[{"id": "world/2022/feb/23/ukraine-urges-its-citizens-to-leave-russia-immediately", "title": " Ukraine president vows to defend country as Russia says separatists ‘ask for military help’", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/23/ukraine-urges-its-citizens-to-leave-russia-immediately", "body": "Ukraine’s president has made a desperate appeal to the Russian people asking them to “listen to the voice of reason” and stop a war he said the Kremlin has already ordered. After Ukraine declared a state of emergency and started calling up reservists, Volodymyr Zelenskiy delivered a 10-minute video address in the early hours of Thursday morning, saying Vladimir Putin had not taken his call. “Today I initiated a phone call with the president of the Russian Federation. The result was silence,” Zelenskiy said. For months, the Ukrainian president had played down the threat of invasion as alarmist, but by Thursday he was convinced that Europe was the brink of a horrendous new conflict. “We are separated by more than 2,000 km of mutual borders, along which 200,000 of your soldiers and a thousand armoured vehicles are standing. Your leadership has approved their step forward on to the territory of another country. This step could become the beginning of a big war,” Zelenskiy said. “They’re telling you that this flame will liberate the people of Ukraine, but the Ukrainian people are free.” Ukraine called an emergency session of the UN security council to confront Russia which, by irony of the rota, will be chairing the meeting. Meanwhile Zelenskiy’s approach was to try to speak directly to ordinary Russians, on a video uploaded to Telegram messaging app, over the heads of the Kremlin, predicting that the Russian media would not broadcast it. “I know this speech of mine won’t be shown on Russian TV, but the people of Russia need to see it,” the Ukrainian president said. They need to know the truth. The truth is that this must be stopped before it is too late.” “Listen to yourselves, to the voice of reason. The people of Ukraine want peace,” Zelenskiy said. But he added: “if someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves.” “By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces,” he said. Early on Thursday morning, Russia issued an alert warning all civilian aviation to stay out of the air space over the border between Russia and northeast Ukraine. As it manoeuvred its forces ever closer to the border and arrayed them in attack formation, the Kremlin announced it had received a request from the leaders of the small Moscow-run enclaves in east Ukraine asking for urgent assistance “to avoid civilian casualties and a humanitarian catastrophe”. Putin secured formal backing from Russia parliament on Tuesday, to deploy Russian forces beyond the country’s borders. For several days, Putin and his aides had been claiming there was a “genocide” of Russian speakers under way in the Donbas region, in the absence of any evidence. Dossiers of supposed evidence circulated at the UN and to the media, largely consisted of improvised burial sites of civilian casualties from shelling over the eight-year conflict there. Many of the dead referred to in the Russian dossier had died in the first year of fighting in 2014, when there were substantial civilian casualties on both sides of the frontline. According to several media reports, confirmed by the Guardian, the White House has warned the Zelenskiy government to expect a large-scale offensive in the next 48 hours. The north-eastern city of Kharkiv, 40kms from the border with Russia, is at particular risk, Newsweek CNN reported, citing US intelligence. “They have advanced their readiness where they are literally ready to go now if they get the order to go now,” a senior US defence official told reporters. “We assess today that he [Putin] is near 100% of all the forces we anticipated he would move in,” the official said, adding that 80% of those forces were in combat-ready positions. “They have plans to use reserves and their equivalent of the national guard. The implication would be that they have long-term goals here.” The Biden administration’s predictions of imminent attack have been wrong before, with a date given of last Wednesday – 16 February. But US, UK and Ukrainian officials all concur that Putin has to move in the next few days, or risk exhausting his troops waiting on the border.\n“We are potentially close to some sort of action,” the Pentagon spokesperson, John Kirby, said on Wednesday evening, adding: “Russian forces continue to assemble closer to the border.” Kirby said that Putin “is going to have to answer to Russian moms and dads about their soldiers that aren’t making it back home alive or making it back with injuries.”\nOn Wednesday, Ukraine prepared its population for the prospect of a devastating war. The country’s parliament voted to approve a state of emergency, which allows authorities to impose curfews and restrictions on movement, block rallies and ban political parties and organisations. Some 36,000 reservists were mobilised, and a law was passed allowing Ukrainians to carry personal firearms, as many queued to purchase AR-15s and sniper rifles at local gun shops. Airports in the eastern Ukrainian cities of Kharkiv, Dnipro, and Zaporizhzhia closed their air space, and the nearly 3 million Ukrainians still in Russia were told to leave as soon as possible, warned that their government might not be able to help them much longer. The Ukrainian government said a massive cyber-attack had targeted ministries and banks on Wednesday. Officials have warned that Russia could use elements of hybrid warfare to sow confusion before launching an all-out military assault. Russia began evacuating its embassy in Kyiv on Wednesday to “protect the lives and safety [of diplomats]” [of diplomats]. Diplomats were filmed walking quickly with their luggage to waiting cars and smoke was observed emerging from the grounds in a possible effort to burn sensitive documents. The Russian flag was lowered. On the same day, EU countries approved tough new sanctions on Russian officials and “propagandists” , imposing asset freezes and travel bans on Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, and 351 Duma deputies who voted to recognise the Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine. In Washington Joe Biden said he was allowing sanctions to move forward against the company that built the Russia-to-Germany Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, a day after Germany indefinitely suspended the project. But Russia appears unmoved by the diplomatic pressure. In fiery remarks at the United Nations on Wednesday, ambassador Vasily Nebenzya accused Ukraine of genocide and human rights violations against those living in Donbas, a claim widely denounced as being as false. Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, said Putin would have to decide in the next few days whether to attack Ukraine. “There are two scenarios. One, they engage in some sort of action. The other is they go for a strategic pause. For now, it’s 50-50.” He said the Russian troops massed in Belarus on Ukraine’s border were sleeping in tent encampments and were “literally tired”. The longer they stayed in a holding position the less effective they became, he said. “Either Moscow starts something or they are rotated out,” he added.\nDenis Pushilin, the leader of the Russian-controlled territory in Donetsk, said on Wednesday that he would not immediately order an attack on Ukrainian positions on the frontline but would not rule out a “military solution” to expanding his region’s borders, either. Appearing alongside the head of Russia’s ruling United Russia party, Pushilin said that Russia and its client state were not yet at the stage of a “military solution to [expanding] to the region’s borders”. On Wednesday, Putin delivered a video address in connection with the Defender of the Fatherland Day, a national holiday recognising members of the military and on which most Russian men receive presents.\nIn the speech, he praised the battle-readiness of Russia’s military, which has 190,000 soldiers on the borders with Ukraine according to western estimates. “Our country is always open for direct and honest dialogue, for the search for diplomatic solutions to the most complex problems,” Putin said. But he added: “The interests of Russia, the security of our citizens, are non-negotiable for us.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/denis-pushilin-leonid-pasechnik-donetsk-luhansk-ukraine-crisis", "title": "‘Their golden hour’: Donetsk and Luhansk leaders revel in rising profile", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/denis-pushilin-leonid-pasechnik-donetsk-luhansk-ukraine-crisis", "body": "For many Russians, it was an unfamiliar sight to see the faces of the two leaders of the pro-Kremlin proxy states in eastern Ukraine pop up on their television screens last Friday, announcing the mass evacuation of Donbas citizens to Russia. Since then, however, Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik, heads of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, have seen their political profiles rocket, culminating on Monday with the two leaders asking the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to recognise their “republics”. “This is their golden hour; they are quickly becoming stars,” said the political analyst Konstantin Skorkin, a Luhansk native who focuses on the region. Amid reports of Russian tanks rolling into the Donbas, questions have arisen as to what extent the separatists have been acting on their own accord or are just pawns in the Kremlin’s bigger geopolitical aims. “They are simply puppets of the Kremlin and the recent events only confirmed this once again,” said Skorkin.\nHe points to how each statement that the two leaders made over the past week was quickly picked up by state media and the Kremlin. “The Russian leadership coordinated everything and nothing was left to chance,” the analyst said. The two regions have been highly dependent on Russian support since their formation in 2014 as they suffered economic collapse during their eight years of unrecognised independence. The regions’ People’s Militia is also fully armed by the Russian state, and Ukrainian officials believe up to 11,000 Russian soldiers are permanently stationed in the Donbas. “They just simply wouldn’t exist without Russian support,” said Nikolaus von Twickel, former OSCE staff member in Donetsk who has written extensively on the Donbas. “But their relationship with Moscow has changed over the years.” In the chaos that followed the 2014 Maidan revolution, a number of rogue and unpredictable local leaders emerged as heads of the two separatist states. Von Twickel said the Kremlin had since worked systematically to replace these firebrands with trusted loyalists. Analysts see 2018 as a turning point in the relative independence of the region, when Alexander Zakharchenko, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s republic, was killed in a car bomb and replaced by the more reliable Pushilin. The Ukrainian security service said at the time Zakharchenko’s death was a result of an operation by Russian special forces. “Zacharchenko had his own personal army, and the Donbas even had its own defence ministry – all of that has disbanded since. It was a clear signal that the rebels will only act according to Kremlin’s rules,” Von Twickel said. And while experts now point to the very limited autonomy of Pushilin and Pasechnik, closely following the two leaders can serve as a good indication of what the Kremlin may do next in Ukraine. Denis Pushilin\nThe younger and more charismatic of the two, not much is known about Pushilin’s early days in the Donbas. He first came to prominence in 2011, while working for the infamous MMM group, a notorious Russian Ponzi scheme that is considered to be one of the world’s largest fraud organisations of all time. “He is your typical wheeler-dealer kind of guy,” said Von Twickel. Pushilin joined the separatist cause early on in 2014, but in contrast to some of the other Donetsk leaders, he never saw any large military action, often sporting a suit in public, a habit he was occasionally mocked for by the other rebels. But over the years, Pushilin looked to have gained the Kremlin’s trust as he became the head of the region after the murky murder of Zakharchenko. Pushilin has repeatedly expressed his desire for the region to be part of a “renewed Russian empire” rather than an independent state. “Donbas should be part of the Russian empire. I don’t see anything bad in imperialism,” he once said. Leonid Pasechnik\nPrior to the 2014 Maidan revolution, Pasechnik had a long career in the Ukrainian security services, where he rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel. He first received national attention in 2006 when in a special operation he intercepted 7.24m Russian roubles in cash (almost £2m) that was being smuggled across the Russian-Ukrainian border. Pasechnik reportedly refused to take a bribe from the smugglers in the operation, receiving a medal from the pro-western Ukrainian president, Viktor Yushchenko, for the operation. Like many other generals in the Ukrainian security services in the Donbas, Pasechnik chose the side of the pro-Russian separatists in 2014, when he headed the notorious state security department of the self-proclaimed Luhansk people’s republic. “He operated the main prisons and the so-called isolation cells, cellars where pretty sinister stuff happened,” said Von Twickel, referring to the many media reports depicting stories of torture of those who opposed the separatists. In 2017, Pasechnik emerged as the victor of a violent power struggle with the then head of Luhansk, Igor Plotnitsky. Not much has since been heard from the camera-shy and timid Pasechnik, and he has somewhat looked out of place as he was suddenly sprung into the country’s spotlight."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/qa-could-putin-use-russian-gas-supplies-to-hurt-europe", "title": "Is Putin’s Ukraine invasion about fossil fuels?", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/qa-could-putin-use-russian-gas-supplies-to-hurt-europe", "body": "What is the relationship between Russia’s threats to Ukraine and the gas price crisis? Gas prices are soaring globally, largely because of the resurgence of demand for fossil fuels after the Covid-19 pandemic and lockdowns, depleted storage and the difficulty of ramping up supply after the disruptions of the past two years. But prices have also been significantly affected by Russia’s recent decision to tighten gas supplies to Europe, which experts believe was driven by Vladimir Putin’s desire to move against Ukraine. Europe is dependent on Russia for about 40% of its natural gas supplies, and despite the expansion of renewable energy over the past two decades, that dependency is increasing as countries shift to gas, away from dirtier coal. Germany is particularly vulnerable, as it has shut down nearly all of its nuclear power stations and aims to eliminate coal by 2030. A major new gas pipeline, Gazprom’s $11bn Nord Stream 2 from Russia across the Baltic to Germany, which would heat 26m German homes, has been the focus of Germany’s diplomatic relations with Russia since it was announced in 2015. Construction on the 1,200km pipeline was completed last year, but no gas has yet flowed and its future is now in doubt as Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz dramatically halted approval for the project on Tuesday.\nConcerns that Russia is using its gas supplies as a weapon to achieve its political aims are well founded. Fatih Birol, executive director of the International Energy Agency, noted that Russia’s decision to drop gas supplies to Europe by a quarter came as it was heightening tension towards Ukraine. “I hope this was only a coincidence,” he told the Guardian. Is this really another war over fossil fuels? No. Energy resources are not the focus of this threatened conflict. Vladimir Putin has a long history of territorial ambitions in former Soviet nations, which he made explicit this week, and of attempts to exert political control over Ukraine. Putin is said by supporters to be concerned over the possibility of Nato expansion, although many analysts say this is a pretext. So the Ukraine crisis is not a war over resources, but it has many implications for resource use. Russia is effectively weaponising its dominance over European gas supply for political ends. Reducing reliance on Russian gas is an urgent necessity for the EU to reach net zero emissions, and would also diminish Putin’s political leverage over the EU. It is also worth noting that in the longer term, as Europe weans itself off gas and pursues net zero emissions, the value of this political weapon will wane rapidly. Russia’s industries have never recovered from the fall of communism, and its economy is now based overwhelmingly on the export of fossil fuels, with much of the rest made up of energy-dependent mineral resources, such as iron, steel, aluminium and other metals, and some agriculture. Four in 10 roubles accruing to Russia’s federal budget pre-pandemic came from oil and gas, which made up 60% of Russian exports in 2019. Kremlin strategists are therefore keenly aware that in the longer term the global move to net zero threatens the whole basis of Russia’s economy and global influence. Why is Europe so dependent on Russian gas? Historically, much of Europe was heavily dependent on coal for power and heating. Renewable energy generation has more than doubled since 2004, and reached 22% of final energy production in 2020. However, at the same time the share generated from nuclear power has fallen, from about a third of the EU’s electricity in 1995 to about a quarter today. After the accident at Japan’s Fukushima nuclear power plant in 2011, Germany’s then chancellor Angela Merkel announced an “Energiewende” – an energy shift – that would see all of the country’s reactors shut down. This has increased Germany’s need for gas, and similar moves away from coal and towards lower emissions in other countries – including the UK, which despite North Sea gas production is a net importer of gas – have heightened the dependency. The geopolitical implications of this dependency, as well as the climate impacts, are now unignorable. Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House climate adviser, now with the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington DC, says: “It has taken the current crisis for Germany and the EU to recognise that its co-dependence on Russian gas is a geopolitical and climate nightmare from which they must finally awake. Reducing Russian gas reliance is a huge climate and moral imperative that Europe must prioritise.” Will Russia turn off gas supplies to Europe if the EU and the UK impose sanctions? That would be a momentous move from Russia. Any further reductions of Russian gas supply to Europe would have severe consequences, for Europe but also for Russia itself. Birol said earlier this month, before sanctions were imposed: “If Russia stops the gas supply to Europe, it could have a seismic impact on European energy. [Russia] has to consider the consequences if existing oil and gas supplies to Europe are halted.” He added: “Failure to maintain [supplies] would shatter Russia’s reputation as a reliable partner and that would be a tectonic shift. Russia would be seen as a threat and that would have far-reaching consequences for European economies, but even more consequences for Russia. Europe would choose a strategy to diverge from Russia.” What impact will Russia’s actions in Ukraine have on climate diplomacy? Russia was almost invisible at the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow last November, after a surprising public commitment to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2060. But the Kremlin has left the details of the goal vague and shown little sign of updating Russia’s emissions commitments for 2030, which are key to limiting global temperature rises to 1.5C. This is a crucial year for climate diplomacy, as the pledges from all countries in Glasgow are still inadequate for the 1.5C goal, and the UK Cop26 presidency is hoping for major progress before the next UN climate meeting in Egypt this November. Russia’s stance on Ukraine will certainly have an impact on those discussions, not least as any conflict will focus attention on the move from fossil fuels. It is also notable that Russia’s oil and gas operations are among the worst in the world for the climate. Data released this week by the IEA shows that emissions of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas and the major component of natural gas, are 70% higher than countries had claimed. Russia makes little or no attempt to capture methane from its oil and gas drilling, and to stop its pipelines leaking, so there are huge opportunities. If Putin were serious about tackling the climate crisis, Russia could provide an invaluable service to the rest of the world by plugging these leaks – reducing methane globally by a third by 2030 could reduce temperatures by 0.2C – and at current gas prices this could be done at no net cost and could even be profitable. Should the UK be fracking more, or producing more from the North Sea, to reduce dependency on Russian gas? No. Attempts to frack in the UK started more than a decade ago, but went nowhere, in part because of protests but also because the economics of industrial fracking in a densely populated country make it impractical. Any move to restart fracking now would take many years to produce any gas, long after the current gas price crisis has been forgotten. New licences for oil and gas exploration in the North Sea are also currently under consideration by the government, and on Thursday the Committee on Climate Change will publish its advice to ministers on whether these licences can be compatible with the UK’s climate goals. However, any newly licensed fields would also take years to come into production, so would have no impact on the current crisis. Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change at the London School of Economics, warns of falling for false solutions: “We know that some opponents of climate policy will try to hide the truth and instead fool the public into falsely believing that the soaring prices are due to green energy. If they are successful, they might slow down the transition to clean domestic energy.” Far more good could be done in the shorter term by insulating homes and ramping up renewable energy generation. What is the answer to the crisis? Rachel Kyte, dean of the Fletcher School at Tufts University in the US and an adviser to the UN secretary-general on the climate, says: “The west needs to meet Putin’s flagrant breach of international law with tough sanctions to force a change in calculus in Moscow. Putin believes he has to the largest extent sanction-proofed Russia, but Russia earns hundreds of millions of dollars a day from sales of oil and refined products, and more from sales of gas and minerals. “Weaning ourselves off these as quickly as possible is one route available to the west. In fact, Putin’s understanding of what decarbonisation would mean for Russian energy exports in the medium and long term may be a factor in the timing of Putin’s attack on Ukraine now.” Ending the use of fossil fuels is imperative, to reach net zero emissions and stave off the worst impacts of climate breakdown. But the shift will also create geopolitical tensions as the world’s massive fossil fuel exporters – Russia, Saudi Arabia and some other Middle Eastern countries, Latin American oil producers, Australia – begin to lose out economically. The crisis in Ukraine shows that some fossil fuel producers at least may not want to give up without a struggle the political leverage they gain from their resources."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/western-leaders-decry-vladimir-putin-as-russia-launches-attacks-on-ukraine", "title": "Western leaders decry Vladimir Putin as Russia launches attacks on Ukraine", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/western-leaders-decry-vladimir-putin-as-russia-launches-attacks-on-ukraine", "body": "Western leaders have responded with fury to Russia’s “barbaric” military attacks on Ukrainian cities and vowed to hold the Kremlin to account for the invasion with a barrage of crippling sanctions. Shortly after reports broke of explosions near Kyiv, the US president, Joe Biden, accused his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, of choosing a “premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering”. “The prayers of the world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces,” he said.\n“Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring, and the United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way,” Biden said. “The world will hold Russia accountable.” Biden said he had spoken to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on the phone shortly after the attacks began, and said he had told him he and allied partners would be “imposing severe sanctions on Russia” once the G7 leaders had met on Thursday. “We will continue to provide support and assistance to Ukraine and the Ukrainian people.” A joint statement issued by the 27 heads of state and government of the EU warned Russia that they would later on Thursday agree on “further restrictive measures that will impose massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action, in close coordination with our transatlantic partners.” The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, told the House of Commons that the UK and its allies would respond with “a massive package of sanctions” that will “hobble the Russian economy”. He said: “Ukraine is a country that for decades has enjoyed freedom and democracy and the right to choose its own destiny. We and the world cannot allow that freedom just to be snuffed out. We cannot and will not just look away.”\nA Downing Street spokesperson said the prime minister had told Ukraine’s president he hoped his forces could resist the onslaught. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who had made a last ditch effort to broker peace through a summit between Putin and Biden, was in contact with Zelenskiy on his mobile phone early on Thursday. He said: “France strongly condemns Russia’s decision to wage war on Ukraine. Russia must end its military operations immediately. “France stands in solidarity with Ukraine. It stands with the Ukrainians and works with its partners and allies to end the war.” In a statement, Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said: “Germany condemns in the strongest possible terms this unscrupulous act by President Putin. Our solidarity goes out to Ukraine and its people.” The world “will not forget this day of shame”, Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, said.\nMario Draghi, Italy’s prime minister, who has until now been cautious over imposing the most hard-hitting sanctions on Russia, suggested the EU would be unified in an immediate and tough response. He said: “The Italian government condemns Russia’s attack on Ukraine. It is unjustified and unjustifiable. “Italy is close to the Ukrainian people and institutions in this dramatic moment. We are working with European and Nato allies to respond immediately, with unity and determination.” Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said his government strongly condemned Russia’s one-sided aggression. A virtual meeting of the G7, the world’s seven biggest economies, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK and the US, is scheduled for later on Thursday.\nUrsula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, the presidents of the European Commission and European Council, issued a joint statement in which they promised financial and humanitarian assistance for Kyiv and vowed to “impose massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action”. Von der Leyen said Putin was responsible “for bringing war back to Europe”, describing the Russian leader’s behaviour as “barbaric”, as she outlined the scale and scope of the punitive measures planned. She said: “We will hold President Putin accountable for that. With this package, we will target strategic sectors of the Russian economy by blocking their access to key technologies and markets. “We will weaken Russia’s economic base and its capacity to modernise. In addition, we will freeze Russian assets in the EU and stop the access of Russian banks to the European financial market.”\nEU leaders will meet in Brussels on Thursday evening to discuss the long-prepared “full monty” package of sanctions against Russia, which have been designed to cripple the country’s economy. They range from cutting Russia out of the Swift payment system that lubricates world trade, to imposing export controls on critical goods such as high-tech components that the country cannot replace in the fields of artificial intelligence and weaponry, quantum computers, lasers and space. The foreign ministers for Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania said in a joint statement that the agreed measures had to include “disengaging Russia from Swift”. They said: “We would need to urgently provide Ukrainian people with weapons, ammunition and any other kind of military support to defend itself.” Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, announced that an alliance summit will be held on Friday, with Finland and Sweden in attendance as non-members. He said: “It will be a new reality, a new Europe after the invasion we saw today” Following an emergency meeting of the North Atlantic council, the alliance’s political decision making body, new guidance had also been issued to to its military commanders to allow them to more quickly move military forces around Europe, he said. He said: “We have already increased and we are increasing the presence of Nato troops in the eastern part of the alliance. “We do not have Nato troops in Ukraine and we do not have plans to send Nato troops to Ukraine.”\nStoltenberg, speaking in Brussels, said that Russia was waging war with air and missile attacks, ground forces and special forces from multiple directions, targeting the military infrastructure and major urban centres. He said: “This is a brutal act of war. Our thoughts are with the brave people of Ukraine. “Sadly, what we have warned against for months has come to pass. Despite all calls on Russia to change course and tireless efforts to seek a diplomatic solution. “Peace in our continent has been shattered. We now have war in Europe, on a scale and of a type we thought belong to history. “This is a grave moment for the security of Europe.”\nSpain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, tweeted: “The government of Spain condemns Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and expresses its solidarity with the Ukrainian government and its people. I remain in close contact with our partners and allies in the European Union and Nato to coordinate our response.” The United Nations secretary general António Guterres, who had urged Putin just before the assault began to stop his troops from attacking, tweeted an updated plea. “Under the present circumstances, I must change my appeal: President Putin, in the name of humanity, bring your troops back to Russia,” he said. “This conflict must stop now.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/thursday-briefing-russia-invades-ukraine", "title": "Thursday briefing: Russia launches attack on Ukraine", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/thursday-briefing-russia-invades-ukraine", "body": "Top story: Kremlin invokes ‘demilitarisation’ as excuse Hello – Warren Murray introducing the news on a day we feared would come. Russian forces have attacked Ukraine on the orders of Vladimir Putin, who announced what he called a “special military operation” at dawn. Explosions and airstrikes have been heard this morning near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv, and air raid sirens went off. Our correspondent Luke Harding reported earlier: “At least seven ‘powerful’ airstrikes on Vasilkovsky airport outside Kyiv, where Ukraine’s military fighter bombers are kept, Kyiv command says.” The Ukraine foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, confirmed what he called the “full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes.”\nIn a bid to justify the invasion, Putin branded Ukraine an “anti-Russia … created on our historic lands” and claimed the campaign was for the “demilitarisation and denazification” of Russia’s neighbour – echoing a false theme of Kremlin propaganda that the Kyiv government is controlled by the far right. Joe Biden said: “The prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces. President Putin has chosen a premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering.” Boris Johnson said: “I am appalled by the horrific events in Ukraine and I have spoken to President Zelenskiy to discuss next steps. President Putin has chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction by launching this unprovoked attack on Ukraine. The UK and our allies will respond decisively.” Here’s what we know so far about the Russian invasion. Make sure you keep up with the rapid developments in Ukraine at our live blog.\nAs Putin was speaking and the first detonations were reported, the UN security council was holding an emergency session, chaired by Russia itself, which holds the rotating presidency, and at which the Russian and Ukrainian representatives traded barbs. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, earlier put out an address appealing directly to the Russian people to “listen to the voice of reason”. Russia’s leadership, he said, was “telling you that this flame will liberate the people of Ukraine, but the Ukrainian people are free”. He warned: “If someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves. By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces.”\nWith international condemnation growing, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, the commanders-in-chief of the Russian air force and Black Sea fleet, leading state “propagandists” and 351 Duma deputies are expected to be identified in EU sanctions that go further than the US, and further still than Boris Johnson’s Russia sanctions. Larry Elliott thinks that targeting Putin’s regime economically has mixed prospects: “Putin has been actively seeking to insulate Russia from the west ever since the invasion of the Crimea in 2014 … [and] Russia has used the money from its oil and gas exports to build up substantial financial defences. Moscow is sitting on foreign currency reserves of about $500bn (£369bn) and, by international standards, has extremely low levels of national debt.” The latter has a bearing on sanctions that stop Russia issuing or trading its sovereign debt in London and New York: the amount of bonds Russia needs to sell is relatively small.\nEurope’s dependence on gas from Russia looms large in all of this, of course. According to calculations by the Institute of Energy Economics at the University of Cologne shared with the Guardian, current levels of gas held in European reserves “could compensate for a loss of Russian deliveries” over the next six weeks unless temperatures were to drop dramatically in February or March. The US and other countries have said they are ready to step in with supplies of gas if Russia cuts Europe off. * * * Another 10 years of debt – Students in England will have to continue paying back university loans over 40 years instead of 30. The number of graduates repaying in full is expected to double from under a quarter to more than half. They will face repayments sooner as the government cuts the wage threshold from £27,295 to £25,000 for new borrowers from September 2023. Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, said: “It’s effectively a lifelong graduate tax for most.” Larissa Kennedy, president of the UK National Union of Students, said ministers were “saddling young people with unimaginable debt for the next 40 years of their lives”.\nIn a concession, interest rates on student loans will be slashed for new borrowers and set no higher than the rate of inflation from next year – but Labour’s shadow education secretary accused the government of delivering a stealth tax that hits those on low incomes hardest. The government is also launching consultations on introducing minimum eligibility requirements to access student loans; and a lifelong loan entitlement for the equivalent of four years of post-18 education. * * * Meat and cancer – Vegetarians have a 14% lower chance of developing cancer than meat eaters, according to a large study by Oxford researchers. Compared with people who eat meat more than five times a week, those who consumed small amounts had a 2% lower risk of cancer. The authors made clear that their findings did not conclusively prove regular meat-eating increased the risk of cancer. Smoking and body fat could also help explain the differences found, they said. Low meat eaters in the study had a 9% lower risk of developing bowel cancer than regular meat eaters. Vegetarian women were 18% less likely than those who ate meat regularly to develop postmenopausal breast cancer, though that may be due to their lower body mass index. Vegetarian men had a 31% lower risk of prostate cancer, while among males who still ate fish it was 20% lower. * * * Starmer v Sunak – Keir Starmer will today pledge to “reimagine the role of government” as a partner to the private sector and take advantage of the opportunities of Brexit. Speaking in Huddersfield, the Labour leader will promise to value private companies as a partner to the state, and lay into Rishi Sunak and the Conservatives for “increasing taxes more than any other chancellor in half a century”. Labour’s strategy is for Starmer to drill issues such as tax and the cost of living to inflame Tory divisions and put Sunak in the spotlight given his ambitions to succeed Johnson as leader. Sunak will be delivering the annual Mais lecture at Bayes business school, in which he will say he wants to cut taxes “sustainably” and downgrade the role of the state as an engine of growth – aiming to quell concern among Tory backbenchers about the tax burden rising to its highest level in 70 years. * * * Ikea but it’s Lidl – Today, Ikea’s £170m experiment on the former Kings Mall in Hammersmith will be tested with the opening of Livat, its first city centre shopping mall globally and the first to be refurbished rather than built from scratch.\nIkea has 47 other shopping centres worldwide, but Livat is just over a third of the size of its typical site, and its first in the UK. It houses Ikea’s only high street store in the UK, a quarter the size of a typical store, as well as a Lidl, a Library of Things, and Sook, a rent-by-the hour retail or events space. Today in Focus podcast: Covid gets free rein Today marks the first day in nearly two years that no laws will be in place in England to deal with the spread of Covid-19. But is the government still following the science?\nLunchtime read: One person’s influence is someone else’s profit More and more young people are enticed by the glittering promises of a career as an influencer – but it’s usually someone else getting rich.\nSport Ralf Rangnick admitted Manchester United’s plan was in the “dustbin” after Atlético Madrid scored on seven minutes before Anthony Elanga’s second half equaliser snatched a draw for the interim manager’s team in the Champions League last-16 first leg. Antonio Conte has questioned whether he is the right manager to turn Tottenham’s fortunes around after Burnley inflicted their fourth defeat in five games. England manager Sarina Wiegman said her side have taken “lots of information” from their 3-1 victory against Germany and inaugural Arnold Clark Cup win but will not get carried away before the European Championship in the summer. In the Premier League, Liverpool hammered Leeds 6-0 at Anfield, with two goals each for Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané and one apiece for Joël Matip and Virgil van Dijk. England coach Eddie Jones is expected to deploy Manu Tuilagi at centre for the Six Nations encounter with Wales, who have dropped Louis Rees-Zammit. After four Olympic Games, seven gold and two silver medals, Sir Jason Kenny, Britain’s most decorated Olympian, has announced his retirement. Joe Root has declined to divulge his role in the decision to drop Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad for the West Indies tour but said it does not shut the door on their record-breaking careers. And Lewis Hamilton has accused Formula One stewards of potential bias towards specific drivers and teams as old wounds were reopened on the first day of pre-season testing in Barcelona on Wednesday. Business Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine has wreaked havoc on already-wobbly financial markets this morning with shares falling precipitously in Asia Pacific overnight. Hong Kong was the worst hit, down more than 3%, and the FTSE100 is set to shed around 2.5% at the opening bell. Brent crude soared past $100 a barrel in a sign of increasing nerves about the impact on supplies, the Russian rouble hit a record low and the Moscow stock exchange suspended trading on all markets. The US dollar strengthened on all the uncertainty and left the pound at $1.349 and €1.201. The papers The print editions were slightly overtaken by events today. The Guardian’s splash is “State of emergency in Ukraine as US warns Putin ready to invade”. “Welcome to hell” – the Mirror says that is the “warning from Ukraine” to Russian soldiers if they invade. But the Express says Putin is “Hell-bent” and has “gone full tonto” – the latter having been said by the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, and the former by Liz Truss, the foreign secretary. Wallace clearly had the better line: “Putin’s gone ‘full tonto’” is the Metro’s page one headline.\nThe Financial Times says “Brussels hits Putin’s inner circle as US hardens invasion warning”. The i has a front-page Ukraine picture overlaid with “State of emergency declared as nation feels ‘knot of fear’”. Its splash though is “Students to face ‘lifelong graduate tax’”, the same story that leads the Times: “Students set to shoulder £100k bill for degrees”. “Sunak vows to slash tax burden” says the Telegraph, while at this moment the Mail is most worried about Britain’s spies being told, as it puts in its own words, to “go woke” by an internal guide to diversity and inclusion. The Sun says mock royal jewels from TV show The Crown have been stolen. Sign up\nThe Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/moment-that-putin-thundered-to-war-drowning-out-last-entreaties-for-peace", "title": "Moment that Putin thundered to war, drowning out last entreaties for peace", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/moment-that-putin-thundered-to-war-drowning-out-last-entreaties-for-peace", "body": "It will go down as one of the most surreal sessions the United Nations chamber has ever witnessed, as the very war it was supposed to prevent broke out while it was sitting. Vladimir Putin, with brutal timing, delivered a speech announcing that Russia would start a “special military operation” in Ukraine – while an emergency session of the UN security council was under way. The secretary general, Antonio Guterres, was the first to speak, and at that time Putin’s intentions were not entirely clear. But Guterres pointed to the reports of troops moving into position, and did something notable and rare for a UN secretary general: he publicly called out the head of a security council permanent member. “If indeed an operation is being prepared, I have only one thing to say, from the bottom of my heart,” Guterres said. “President Putin: stop your troops from attacking Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have already died.”\nBy the time it was the turn of the Russian representative, Vasily Nebenzya, to speak, Putin had given his address, and there was no more mystery. Peace was not to be given a chance after all. Nebenzya, who had spent weeks deriding western states for their “hysterical” warnings of impending invasion, pivoted to argue it was not actually a war that was getting under way, but a “special military operation” to protect the people of the Donbass.\nThe Ukrainian ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, had been waiting for his turn to speak while receiving constant updates from Kyiv. When his time came, he had to dispense with his prepared speech because, he said, “most of it is already useless”. Instead he held up a copy of the UN charter and read the clause that said UN membership was open to all peace-loving states that accepted the obligations contained in the small sky-blue booklet. “Russia is not able to carry out any of those obligations,” Kyslytsya declared. He challenged Nebenzya to deny that Ukraine was under attack. “You have a smartphone,” he said, taunting the Russian to check with his boss, the foreign minister, on what was really going on. “You can call Lavrov right now. We can make a pause to let you go out and call him.” Nebenzya declined. “I have already said all I know at this point,” he said. “Waking up minister Lavrov at this time is not something I plan to do.” An hour or so into the meeting, the multiplying reports of bombardment of Ukrainian cities had reached the chamber, and if the futility of the council’s calls for peace and dialogue had not been clear before, they were now agonisingly obvious. Some ambassadors demanded to speak for a second time to express their sense of betrayal. “At the exact time as we were gathered in the council seeking peace, Putin delivered a message of war in total disdain for the responsibility of this council,” said the US permanent representative, Linda Thomas-Greenfield. “This is a grave emergency.” Her British counterpart, Barbara Woodward, declared it “a grave day for Ukraine and for the principles of the United Nations”. Kyslytsya himself was trembling with emotion. He stared at Nebenzya and demanded the Russian relinquish his duties as chair of the council. “There is no purgatory for war criminals,” he warned him. “They go straight to hell.” At that point, Nebenzya quickly closed the meeting, claiming that Russia’s aggression was not directed at the Ukrainian people, but against what he called “the junta that is in power in Kiev”. Then he adjourned and left. A security council that had begun, just about, in peacetime, had broken up in a time of war, and perhaps at the start of a major conflict."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/australia-condemns-russias-brutal-and-unprovoked-invasion-of-ukraine", "title": "Australia condemns Russia’s ‘brutal and unprovoked’ invasion of Ukraine ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/australia-condemns-russias-brutal-and-unprovoked-invasion-of-ukraine", "body": "The Australian prime minister has promised “further waves of sanctions” against Russians including hundreds of members of parliament as he condemned Vladimir Putin for the brutal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. Scott Morrison said the Russian president had chosen war and Australia would “band together” with the international community to “ensure there is a cost for this violent, unacceptable and egregious behaviour”. But the Ukrainian embassy’s head of mission in Australia wants the federal government to do more, calling for the Coalition’s sanctions to “significantly expand”. The invasion was condemned by both sides of politics in Australia, with the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, saying it was “a grave moment for humanity”. Australia and its allies must hold Russia to account for the “shameful act of aggression”, he said. Within minutes of Putin’s short televised address announcing a “special military operation” about 5am Ukrainian time on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital Kyiv. Ukraine’s government introduced martial law in response to what it said was “a full-scale invasion”.\nMorrison, speaking after briefings from Australian intelligence and security officials in Sydney, said the Russian government had “launched a brutal invasion, unprovoked, on Ukraine, and should be condemned for doing so”. “Right now, our thoughts are very much with those in Ukraine – those who are enduring a terrible invasion as the bombs fall and the shelling continues and the bullets are fired, as special forces from Russia are moving towards Kyiv and tanks are rolling in all around their borders,” Morrison said. A day after announcing sanctions on eight members of Russia’s national security council, Morrison said the government was applying measures on an additional 25 people. “This includes army commanders, deputy defence ministers and Russian mercenaries who have been responsible for the unprovoked and unacceptable aggression,” he said. Sanctions would also be applied to four entities involved in the development and sale of military technology and weapons, he said. Australians would be banned from dealing with a further four financial institutions. “There will be further waves of sanctions as we identify those responsible for these egregious acts, including – as I discussed this afternoon with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – moving on over 300 members of the Russian parliament.” Morrison stopped short of expelling the Russian ambassador, Alexey Pavlovsky, from Australia, saying it was important to maintain channels of communication “even in moments of terrible conflicts such as this”. Morrison did not immediately detail which individuals and entities the sanctions would apply to. A list could be released publicly in the coming days, once the Australian assets of those being targeted are frozen or cut off. The prime minister and the foreign minister, Marise Payne, said in a joint statement that Putin had “fabricated a feeble pretext on which to invade”. “Russia’s disinformation and propaganda have convinced no one,” they said. Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, the Ukrainian embassy’s head of mission in Canberra, told ABC’s 7.30 program his government appreciated any help provided by foreign nations but sanctions “can change the situation”. “We will ask our partners to significantly expand sanctions against Russia,” he said. “We hope that there will be a next stage of sanctions that will cover more people who are involved in the aggression against Ukraine. It will be different financial and energy institutions of Russian origin and Russian oligarchs who have a significant influence on the Kremlin.” Shalkivskyi said Ukraine’s government would “defend our country”. “We were warned, we had time to prepare.”\nThe Australian government has said it stands ready to support internationally coordinated action to respond to any price or supply shocks in energy markets. Morrison said while Australian officials still had no evidence of any state-sanctioned cyber-attacks on Australian targets, the Australian Cyber Security Centre and the corporate sector were prepared for the possibility. He urged the estimated 1,400 Australians who remain in Ukraine to leave if safe to do so and to register with Dfat. The prime minister said his thoughts were with Australians of Ukrainian descent, and also with Australians of Russian descent, who he said “will also be feeling terrible about these events”. The attack on Ukraine follows Putin’s announcement of a “special military operation” which the Russian president claimed was needed to achieve the “demilitarisation” of the country. Putin argued “a hostile anti-Russia is being created on our historic lands”. But Albanese said Putin’s attack on Ukraine was “wholly unprovoked and without justification” and the Russian government alone bore responsibility “for the bloodshed and suffering that will follow”. Albanese and the shadow foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, said the attack would have broader ramifications. “It is also a contemptuous attack on one of the core principles of the post-World War II order, which is that all UN members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state,” they said in a statement. The Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, who has family in Kharkiv, said: “Australian Ukrainians watch with horror at the invasion of a European democracy by the Putin dictatorship.” Public buildings in Melbourne’s CBD are to be lit up in the blue and yellow of the Ukrainian flag in a show of support to the people of Ukraine. The state premier, Daniel Andrews, said it would be “a distressing time for Victorian Ukrainian and Russian communities”. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine saw investors dump assets deemed to be relatively risky, sending stocks lower across the Asia-Pacific, while prices of bonds, oil and gold rose. Australia’s benchmark ASX200 share index tumbled almost 3% on Thursday, ending at 6,900.6 points for the lowest close this month. It was the worst day in about 17 months and erased $73bn from the market’s value, the Australian Financial Review reported. Bourses across the region posted similar falls of 2-3%, with Singapore’s 2.9% decline the largest intraday slide since mid-May. US futures were pointing to falls at 2% when Wall Street reopens later on Thursday. The Australian dollar fell about half a US cent for the day to 71.9 US cents. The Russian rouble is more akin to rubble, dropping 5.8% to a record low 86.12 per US dollar, Reuters reported. Investors bought up government bonds from Australia, the US and elsewhere, pushing prices up and yields lower. Many commodities, though, were in demand as investors speculated that sanctions and disruptions could limit supplies. Brent crude oil breached $US100 a barrel price for the first time since 2014, raising the prospect that Australian motorists will soon have to dig even deeper to pay for fuels that are already at record levels. Economists, such as Saul Eslake, have been wary about predicting much fallout for the Australian dollar, noting the local economy had a strong head of steam coming out of the Covid disruptions.\nMore expensive energy, as well as turmoil on financial markets, could dim consumer confidence, they say. Food prices will also be worth watching – and could stoke inflationary pressures. A Bloomberg gauge of agricultural commodities hit a record high on Thursday. Earlier on Thursday, the Australian government revealed it would wait until the end of March to bring into force the sanctions that specifically curb trade with the two Ukrainian regions now recognised as independent by Putin. However, the initial sanctions on eight members of Putin’s security council will take effect from midnight Thursday."}, {"id": "world/2022/jan/26/living-in-ukraine-how-have-you-been-affected-by-the-current-situation", "title": "Tell us: how have you been affected by the situation in Ukraine?", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/26/living-in-ukraine-how-have-you-been-affected-by-the-current-situation", "body": "We would like to hear from people who are affected by the war in Ukraine. You can share news tips or experiences directly with our journalistsby getting in touch below. Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. You can also contact us via Telegram by clicking here or adding +44(0)7799322095. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Please note that while we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when considering whether to get in touch with the Guardian. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/12/leaving-ukraine-have-you-fled-the-country", "title": "Ukraine: have you left the country?", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/12/leaving-ukraine-have-you-fled-the-country", "body": "In a step that world leaders have said could “spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945,” Vladimir Putin has ordered Russian forces to attack Ukraine and invade the country. We would like to hear from people who are leaving Ukraine or have left in recent days due to the situation. How and when did you make the decision to leave? Where are you going? Have you encountered any issues while leaving the country? We’d also like to hear from foreign nationals who have chosen to stay in the country. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. You can also contact us via Telegram by clicking here or adding +44(0)7799322095. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/kyiv-ukraine-russia-invasion", "title": "Stay or flee? Kyiv comes to terms with disaster of Russian invasion ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/kyiv-ukraine-russia-invasion", "body": "It began in darkness soon after 4.30am local time. There were distant explosions in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, and the whine of car alarms. A nation shook itself awake. What had been foretold by western governments, by experts, and – late in the day – by the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was actually happening. Russia was attacking and invading. Vladimir Putin’s apparent goal: the subjugation of a nation, a culture, a people. It was unthinkable in the twenty-first century. And yet, with imperial swagger, Russian troops, tanks and planes were on the move. The disaster unfurled itself on a grey, ordinary Thursday morning, sprinkled by rain. By 5am friends and loved ones were ringing each other, peering into their phones, making life and death decisions. Stay or flee? Some packed and got ready to leave; others took refuge in apartment block basements. An underground garage began to fill up in Yaroslaviv Val, close to Kyiv’s historic golden gate, dating back to the eleventh century and to Kyivan Rus, a pre-Moscow dynasty. A family arrived. A mother shepherded her two bleary-eyed children to safety. The children were carrying colouring books, scant defence against Russian missiles. By breakfast the scale of Russia’s multitudinous military assault became clear. Putin’s ambitions, it turned out, went well beyond the Donbas region, whose separatist territories he recognised earlier this week. They included practically the entire country: east, south, north and even west. The port city of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov; the city of Kharkiv, home to 1.4 million people; Odesa on the Black Sea and Kherson; Ukrainian-controlled towns and villages on the Donbas frontline – all were being pulverised and bombed.\nRussia was clinically targeting Ukraine’s defences: aerodromes, military bases, ammunition dumps. It was shock and awe, done with a ruthless indifference to human cost. Amid this grandiose onslaught there were moments of normality. A few Kyiv residents emerged to walk their dogs. Queues formed outside cash machines. Most cafes were closed but Aroma Coffee had opened as usual, selling croissants and take-outs. The mood was one of shock, fear and quiet disgust that Putin – without reason or rational pretext – had decided to unleash war. “Russia is 100% wrong,” said Viktor Alexeyvich, speaking in the capital’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti square. Behind him was the city’s independence monument, a marble column once topped with a statue of Vladimir Lenin. Perched on top – at least for now – was a woman with a rose branch in her arms, symbolising Ukraine’s independence, beneath a golden capital. What would he do now? “I’ve going to take my grandson out of the city. And then I will come back,” he said. “I don’t have any weapons but I’m ready to defend my country. Maybe the national guard will help.” Alexeyevich said he had rung his son when he heard the first explosions and turned on the TV. He had watched President Zelenskiy address the nation, introduce martial law, and urge citizens to be calm, he said. “Putin is the aggressor here. He’s invade Ukraine because we don’t want to live under his strictures, his model.” The normally-busy square full of tourists and shoppers was sparser than usual. A few people waited in the rain for a municipal trolley-bus. For months, Kyiv’s pro-western government has said Ukraine will resist Russian attack and occupation. It says the country’s armed forces are in better shape than in 2014, when they wilted under superior Russian firepower. On paper, this is true: Ukraine has 220,000 troops, 400,000 veterans with combat experience and modern weapons recently supplied by the US, UK and other allies. Ukraine’s operational command reported some early successes on Thursday in beating back attacks from the rebel-held cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, run for the past eight years by Moscow’s loyal proxies.\nAnd yet the cars streaming out of Kyiv told their own story. From early in the day the streets were jammed, as civilians sought a way out – to Zhytomyr, west of the city, and from there to Lviv and the Polish border. Traffic on the boulevards moved slowly. There was no panic as such but an awareness that the window to leave was beginning to close. Reports suggested Russian formations were advancing to the capital from Belarus and the north, two hours’ drive and 160kms away. They had broken through the international check-point and – seemingly – were trundling Kyiv-wards through a primordial landscape of pine trees and swamp. It seemed Belarus was facilitating war on Kyiv too. Oleg Olegovich, a 30-year-old officer in the Ukrainian army, said he had been summoned at 4am to come in for work. His office was in the centre of Kyiv. “Civilians are leaving. But we will stay,” he said. Could Ukraine defeat mighty Russia, with its vast air power and Black Sea navy? “We will smash them,” he said. “The military is in good shape, our communications are working.”\nLyudmila – a young city police officer who had popped out for coffee – said she would carry on. “I didn’t sleep last night,” she said. “I tried to sleep before work but I couldn’t manage it.” “Cheerio,” she said with a smile. Nearby, the trade union building overlooking the Maidan played the Ukrainian national anthem on a loudspeaker. Few were around to hear it. It played a key role in the Euromaidan protests in 2013 and 2014 against the country’s pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych. The uprising saw Yanukovych flee to Russia. Since then the country had moved in an emphatically pro-EU and pro-Nato direction. Putin responded in 2014 by annexing Crimea and kickstarting a pro-Russian revolt in the east. Eight years on, he seems determined to stop Ukraine’s westward integration forever. His tactics are familiar from Russia’s bloody wars in Chechnya: brute military force.\nPresident Zelenskiy – a TV star and comedian before he turned to politics – was still in Kyiv and at work, his press service said. Historians may rebuke him for failing to prepare Ukraine for an inevitable Kremlin attack. But in a speech on Wednesday evening – the eve of invasion as it turned out – Zelenskiy addressed the Russian people directly. He reminded them of Ukraine and Russia’s joint ties – of family, friendship and of love – telling them that the portrait painted by Russian state TV of a fascist Ukraine bore no resemblance to its vibrant, modern and tolerant reality. It was his finest hour.\nZelenskiy’s personal fate and that of the country he leads remains unclear. It seems likely Russia will demand his capitulation and replacement with a pro-Russian puppet administration. For the moment he is in power – just. Meanwhile, Kyiv’s familiar rhythms continued. The bells of St Michael’s domed monastery tolled the hour, as they have for centuries. The baroque building sits across the square from Saint Sophia cathedral, an eleventh century building done in vivid turquoise. Locals protesting outside the now-empty Russian embassy on Tuesday pointed out wryly that when it was constructed Moscow was a mere forest.\nThe square’s children’s playground was empty, home now to a few jackdaws and a stray dog. Europe was at war. The world – two decades into the century – had reached a crisis that was likely to reverberate well beyond the early overcast hours of invasion and predation. It was Mikhail Bulgakov in his masterful novel The White Guard, written almost a century ago, who dubbed Kyiv the City, with an upper case C. The City will endure. But it seems only a matter of time before it has new, harsher masters."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/uk-will-respond-decisively-to-russia-attack-on-ukraine-vows-boris-johnson", "title": "Boris Johnson to respond to Russian invasion with ‘overwhelming’ sanctions ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/uk-will-respond-decisively-to-russia-attack-on-ukraine-vows-boris-johnson", "body": "Boris Johnson’s chief of staff, Steve Barclay, has said the UK will respond to Russia’s attack on Ukraine with “overwhelming” sanctions, as the prime minister prepares to address the nation about the crisis. Speaking to MPs at Westminster, Barclay said he was appalled by what he called “an unprovoked attack” and the UK and its allies would respond decisively. He added that the prime minister would address parliament later, “to outline the UK response, including overwhelming sanctions”. After speaking to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy,early in the morning, the prime minister said: “This is a catastrophe for our continent.” He said the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, had “chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction”. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said she had summoned the Russian ambassador “to meet me and explain Russia’s illegal, unprovoked invasion of Ukraine”. She is expected to speak to her counterparts in various countries throughout the day. Following a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee at 7.30am on Thursday, Johnson is expected to give an address to the nation, followed by a call with G7 leaders in the afternoon and a statement in the House of Commons at 5pm. Ukraine’s president declared martial law, while Russia’s military said it had targeted Ukrainian airbases and other military assets and not populated areas. A Downing Street spokesperson said the Cobra committee meeting, chaired by Johnson, discussed the response to the “horrific attacks”.\nBritain, in common with other Nato allies, has said it will not fight Russia, because Ukraine is not a Nato member. But the UK has supplied arms to Kyiv and has already announced limited economic sanctions. The UK previously said it expected Russia to launch an invasion along “multiple axes” – aimed at Ukraine military forces in the east of the country and above all, the capital, Kyiv, in what could be a bloody attempt to force a change of regime. Western officials have said they expect Russia to seek to encircle Ukraine’s major cities and rely on the FSB intelligence service to deliver them with limited fighting. The US has warned key Ukrainian figures could be targeted in this phase. In a statement posted on Twitter at 4.53am, Johnson said he had spoken with Zelenskiy to discuss “next steps”. He said: “I am appalled by the horrific events in Ukraine and I have spoken to President Zelenskiy to discuss next steps. President Putin has chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction by launching this unprovoked attack on Ukraine. The UK and our allies will respond decisively.”\nA Downing Street spokesperson said Johnson had assured Zelenskiy the west “would not stand by as President Putin waged his campaign against the Ukrainian people”. “The prime minister said he hoped Ukraine could resist and that Ukraine and its people were in the thoughts of everyone in the United Kingdom during this dark time,” the spokesperson said. The Foreign Office minister James Cleverly promised there would be an “unprecedented” fresh set of sanctions imposed on Russia for the “appalling decision” to invade Ukraine. He accused Putin of “recreating some kind of tsarist, expansionist Russia” and being driven by ego as well as a “foolish attempt to write himself into the history books”. Cleverly said on Sky News that the Russian stock market had already dropped 30% in value. In London, the FTSE 100 also fell 2.5% to 7,311.69 as Europe awakened to news of the Russian invasion.\nGen Sir Richard Shirreff, a former senior British army officer, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “Absolutely there is a possibility that we as a nation will be at war with Russia. Because if Russia puts one boot-step across Nato territory, we are all at war with Russia – every single member of the Nato alliance.” Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, cancelled a speech on the economy in Huddersfield and called for Johnson to unveil the “hardest possible sanctions” against all those linked to Putin. After the government was criticised for what were derided as weak sanctions announced by the prime minister on Tuesday, Starmer urged the prime minister to “match our rhetoric with action”, and added: “The influence of Russian money must be extricated from the UK.” Britain’s ambassador to Ukraine urged UK nationals to leave the country immediately. Melinda Simmons wrote on Twitter: “We advise GB nationals to leave Ukraine immediately if you judge that it is safe to do so from your location. Please call +380 44 490 3660 if you need assistance.” Putin announced the action during a televised address early on Thursday morning, saying the move was a response to threats from Ukraine. He said Russia did not have a goal to occupy Ukraine, but that the responsibility for bloodshed lay with the Ukrainian “regime”. He also warned other countries that any attempt to interfere with the Russian action would lead to “consequences they have never seen”. The UK’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, described Russia’s actions as “naked aggression against a democratic country” and said no one had been fooled by the Kremlin’s “false flags and fake narratives”. “The Russian Federation has today further violated Ukrainian sovereignty,” he said. “Despite the efforts of the international communities, Russia has chosen conflict. No one has been fooled by the Kremlin’s false flags and fake narratives. “This is naked aggression against a democratic country which had dared to express a different aspiration than being a supine neighbour to Russia. No one should forget this day. Putin thinks this land grab is about securing his legacy – it will be, but not the one that he wishes.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/boris-johnson-promises-massive-sanctions-to-hobble-russian-economy", "title": "Boris Johnson promises massive sanctions to ‘hobble’ Russian economy", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/boris-johnson-promises-massive-sanctions-to-hobble-russian-economy", "body": "Boris Johnson has said that “a vast invasion is under way, by land, by sea and by air” in Ukraine, as he promised to impose “massive” sanctions that would “hobble” the Russian economy. Speaking as world leaders scrambled to respond to the attacks that began early on Thursday, the UK prime minister said Russia had “attacked a friendly country without any provocation and without any credible excuse”. He said Russia must not be allowed to succeed. “Diplomatically, politically, economically, and eventually militarily, this hideous and barbaric adventure of Vladimir Putin must end in failure,” he said. Johnson said Ukraine had for decades been a free country, able to determine its own destiny. “We and the world cannot allow that freedom just to be snuffed out. We cannot and will not just look away. “This act of wanton and reckless aggression is an attack not just on Ukraine. It is an attack on democracy and freedom in eastern Europe and around the world,” he said.\nIn a deliberate reference to Neville Chamberlain, the prime minister remembered for underestimating Hitler’s murderous intentions in the 1930s, Johnson said Ukraine was “not in the infamous phrase some faraway country of which we know little”. Chamberlain used those words when Germany was allowed to annex the Sudetenland – then part of Czechoslovakia – in 1938, in exchange for a promise of peace. In contrast, Johnson said “we have Ukrainian friends in this country; neighbours, co-workers”, telling the Ukrainian people: “We are with you, we are praying for you and your families and we are on your side.” Johnson also made a direct appeal to the Russian people, saying: “I cannot believe this is being done in your name or that you really want the pariah status it will bring to the Putin regime.” The prime minister said the details of financial sanctions would be coordinated with the UK’s international allies.\nHe called for the west to end its dependence on Russian oil and gas as part of its response to the crisis. Oil and gas prices have rocketed in response to the attacks, auguring a sharp increase in fuel and domestic energy prices in the UK. Johnson gave the televised statement after a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee at 7.30am. He is expected to join a meeting of G7 leaders later, before addressing MPs at 5pm to set out details of the sanctions package. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said the sanctions should leave the Putin regime isolated, “its finances frozen, its ability to function crippled”. He called for Johnson to “make a clean break with the failed approach” to handling the Russian leader, saying that Nato responses to past incursions into Georgia, Crimea and Donbas had “fed his belief that the benefits of aggression outweigh the cost”. Starmer also called for the UK to stop being “a safe haven for the money that Putin and his fellow bandits gained by stealing from the Russian people”. He added: “This must be a turning point in our history. We must look back and say that this terrible day was actually when Putin doomed himself to defeat.” Meanwhile, an acrimonious meeting was held in Whitehall after the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, summoned Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrei Kelin. A UK Foreign Office source said Kelin “spouted the usual propaganda” but that Truss was “having none of it” and told him he “should be ashamed of himself”. The source added the foreign secretary had told Kelin the international community would “rally around Ukraine” and that Russia had turned itself into “an international pariah”.\nJohnson faced criticism from across the political spectrum earlier this week for introducing a package of sanctions many MPs, including in his own party, felt were too weak. Tom Tugendhat suggested the limited sanctions announced on Monday may have encouraged the Russian president. “What that did, I’m afraid, was it didn’t deter, but encouraged, because it gave the suggestion or made clear that we weren’t wiling to do anything serious,” the chair of the foreign affairs select committee told the BBC’s Today programme."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/conservative-mps-urge-increase-uk-military-aid-ukraine-russia", "title": "Conservative MPs urge increase in UK military aid for Ukraine", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/conservative-mps-urge-increase-uk-military-aid-ukraine-russia", "body": "Conservative MPs have called for the UK to increase military aid to Ukraine, including the former cabinet minister David Davis, who said the UK should consider providing air support to the Ukrainian armed forces. Boris Johnson said western allies “will agree a massive package of economic sanctions designed in time to hobble the Russian economy” – expected to be outlined to House of Commons at 5pm on Thursday. But Davis said that even the most “ferocious sanctions … are no longer a deterrent, they are a punishment” and that the invasion of Ukraine meant Vladimir Putin had “effectively declared war on the west”. Davis tweeted: “Therefore if we do not provide military support, more than 40 million Ukrainians will go from living in a democracy to living under a brutal dictatorship. “It is far too late to get boots on the ground, but it is not too late to provide air support to the Ukrainian army, which may neutralise Putin’s overwhelming armoured superiority.” Davis said the air support should be confined to the airspace over Ukraine, and based on a request from Ukraine’s president, saying this “should be perfectly legal under almost any interpretation of international law”. He added: “There are no zero-risk options. If we do not act militarily, then Nato will be significantly weakened and we must fear for the safety of every state that borders Russia.” Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence select committee, said a Nato division should have been stationed in Ukraine as a deterrent. Ukraine is not a Nato member, but has requested membership. “If Kyiv falls, history will ask why the west didn’t do more?” Ellwood told the BBC. “Six months ago I called for a division, a Nato division, to be moved into Ukraine. That is what Ukrainians were requesting, and that would have deterred this invasion.\n“That would have been enough to make Putin think twice. But we didn’t do that, we actually did the opposite. We declared that we would not send any Nato troops into Ukraine. We parked that away.” The former minister Stephen Hammond also called for the UK to consider using further military deterrent. “We must stand with Ukraine at this time of continental crisisand ensure Russian aggression does not go unpunished. We must work with our allies to impose tougher sanctions and a no-fly zone,” he said. Russia has significant advantages in air power: its total air force has 1,172 combat aircraft against Ukraine’s 124, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies thinktank.\nUkraine has sought to modernise its military over the past year, receiving Javelin anti-tank missiles from the US, shorter range anti-tank weapons from the UK and a small number of TB2 drones from Turkey. However, the bulk of its equipment dates back to the Soviet era and will be familiar to Russian generals. Alicia Kearns, a Conservative MP and former senior communications officer at the Ministry of Defence, said Britain providing defensive support in Ukrainian airspace should be “on the table and under discussion”. She said this would not be a move taken lightly, as it could mean Russia “shooting British airmen and women out of the sky”. Kearns said the move would be contingent on “meaningful intelligence” suggesting it would “be effective” at curtailing the Russian advance. “We know that Putin has a lot of anti-aircraft ground-to-air missiles,” she said. “He might not have any qualms about taking out British troops. If we went in, it would have to be with other Nato allies – a great number.\n“The alternative is, of course, the UK could put anti-aircraft missiles in neighbouring countries, but that also runs the risk of taking us into overt war with Russia. Kearns added it was “too late to put boots on the ground” but that if Russian troops continued their advance on Kyiv, the UK should consider cyberstrikes on the Kremlin and state firms “within the week”. She also suggested Turkey should be encouraged to deny the Russian navy passage through the Bosphorus straits, a key access point between the Black Sea and Mediterranean. Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs select committee, said weak sanctions such as those announced on Monday “just encourage others to believe we are weak because we’re clearly not willing to do anything serious. “So what that did, I’m afraid, on Monday was it didn’t deter but encouraged, because it gave the suggestion or made clear that we weren’t wiling to do anything serious. “If we are going to do sanctions, as I say, we need to do them extremely hard and extremely early.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/roman-abramovich-linked-to-russian-state-and-corrupt-activity-mp-says", "title": "Roman Abramovich linked to Russian state and ‘corrupt activity’, MP says", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/roman-abramovich-linked-to-russian-state-and-corrupt-activity-mp-says", "body": "The Chelsea owner, Roman Abramovich, was identified by the Home Office in 2019 as having links to the Russian state as well as to “corrupt activity and practices”, a Labour MP has told parliament, suggesting the UK should seize his assets and bar him from owning the football club. Chris Bryant told MPs he was quoting from a Home Office document leaked to him, and asked why nothing more had been done about Abramovich’s UK assets given this official verdict. Raising the issue of tier 1 visas, the sort held by Abramovich, which allow very rich people to invest in the UK, Bryant directly quoted a section of what he said was the Home Office document. “I’ve got hold of a leaked document from 2019, from the Home Office, which says in relation to Mr Abramovich: ‘As part of HMG’s [Her Majesty’s government] Russia strategy aimed at targeting illicit finance and malign activity, Abramovich remains of interest to HMG due to his links to the Russian state and his public association with corrupt activity and practices,’” Bryant told the Commons. He went on, still quoting the document: “‘An example of this is Abramovich admitting in court proceedings that he paid for political influence. Therefore HMG is focused on ensuring individuals linked to illicit finance and malign activity are unable to base themselves in the UK, and will use the relevant tools at its disposal, including immigration powers, to prevent this.’” Bryant added: “That’s nearly three years ago. And yet remarkably little has been done. Surely Mr Abramovich should no longer be able to own a football club in this country? Surely we should be looking at seizing some of his assets, including his £150m home, and making sure that other people who have had tier 1 visas like this are not engaged in malign activity in the UK?” Abramovich, who made his fortune acquiring newly privatised Russian oil assets following the end of the Soviet Union, bought Chelsea in 2003 and has put enormous sums into the club. In 2018 he withdrew his application for a new UK investor visa, amid worsening links between the UK and Russia. Abramovich has an Israeli passport and has since travelled to the UK using that. A week ago the government said it was ending the tier 1 visa system over concerns it allowed people to invest “dirty money” in the UK. On Tuesday, speaking to the Commons as he announced a first wave of measures against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine, Boris Johnson said Abramovich was “already facing sanctions” because of links to the Russian state. However, Downing Street later said the prime minister had made an error, and formally corrected the record. Abramovich has vehemently disputed reports suggesting his alleged closeness to Vladimir Putin and Russia or that he has done anything to merit sanctions being imposed against him. Bryant cannot be sued for quoting the report and its claims about Abramovich, as statements in the Commons are protected by parliamentary privilege. Abramovich’s representatives were contacted for comment."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/23/russia-hacking-malware-cyberattack-virus-ukraine", "title": "Russia-backed hackers behind powerful new malware, UK and US say", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/23/russia-hacking-malware-cyberattack-virus-ukraine", "body": "A cyber report published by intelligence agencies in the UK and US on Wednesday has attributed insidious new malware to a notorious Russia-backed hacking group. The findings come as Russia launches an invasion of Ukraine. The joint research was published by the National Cyber Security Centre in the UK and US agencies including the National Security Agency. It warned that a Russian state-backed hacker group known as Sandworm had developed a new type of malware called Cyclops Blink, which targets firewall devices made by the manufacturer Watchguard to protect computers against hacks.\nThe sophisticated virus can withstand typical remedies including reboots, the report said. The findings come as the UK and US, allies to Ukraine, are on high alert for Russian state-sponsored hacks. The agencies added that their statement was a “routine advisory” not directly linked to the situation in Ukraine. However, the US cybersecurity firm Mandiant said the announcement was a reminder of the damage that could be inflicted by Sandworm, which has been blamed for the devastating NotPetya attack on Ukraine in 2017. John Hultquist, a vice-president at Mandiant Threat Intelligence, said Sandworm remained a “capable and clever” adversary. “In light of the crisis in Ukraine we are very concerned about this actor, who has surpassed all others we track in terms of the aggressive cyber-attacks and information operations they have conducted,” he said. “No other Russian actor has been so brazen and successful in disrupting critical infrastructure in Ukraine and elsewhere.” Ukraine has suffered a string of cyber-attacks that Kyiv has blamed on Russia. Moscow, which is caught up in a mounting confrontation with the west over Ukraine, has denied any involvement. Wednesday saw a massive distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack that targeted websites of Ukraine’s government and banks. “At about 4pm, another mass DDoS attack on our state began. We have relevant data from a number of banks,” said Mykhailo Fedorov, minister of digital transformation, adding that the parliament website was also hit. Ukrainian authorities said this week they had seen online warnings that hackers were preparing to launch major attacks on government agencies, banks and the defense sector. Wednesday’s hack was consistent with the country’s tactics to distract and disrupt adversaries while “providing a level of plausible deniability”, said Rick Holland, chief information security officer at the cybersecurity firm Digital Shadows. “Russia didn’t just decide to invade Ukraine this week,” he said. “Military planners have prepared for this campaign years in advance. Disinformation, false flags, DDoS attacks, and destructive wiper malware are a part of Russian military doctrine; the battle plans have been drawn up and are now being executed.” The White House said on Wednesday that it was in touch with Ukrainian authorities about their cybersecurity needs, in the wake of the fresh cyber-attack, which the US government has not yet attributed. “We are in conversations with Ukraine regarding their cyber-related needs including as recently as today and we’re going to move with urgency to assess the nature and extent of this, what steps need to be taken, and therefore a response,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said. Reuters contributed reporting"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/russia-invading-ukraine-putin-nato-what-can-west-do", "title": "What can the west do about Russia invading Ukraine? ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/russia-invading-ukraine-putin-nato-what-can-west-do", "body": "In the wake of what the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, described as Russia’s “fully fledged invasion of Ukraine”, the west has to decide how to respond to what France’s Emmanuel Macron has called a turning point in European history. Yet can the west now offer Ukraine more than a mixture of prayers, sanctions and diplomatic demarches? Throughout this conflict western intelligence has shown it has been able to predict Putin’s next step, but less capable of stopping it. Boris Johnson told the Ukrainian people “we are with you”, but what this western solidarity means in practice is now up for debate. The 30-nation Nato alliance will stick to its pledge that it will never send forces to protect Ukraine as a non-Nato member. Backbench Tory calls to give Ukraine air support have no support in Nato. Instead the west will test Russia’s resolve through tough sanctions and by some countries providing arms if there is a resistance. The coordinated sanctions in Washington, London, Berlin and Brussels being announced on Thursday are billed as massive, but Putin sits on a $600bn (£450bn) war chest and will benefit from oil prices soaring past $100 a barrel. That makes him less dependent on the west to raise capital than five years ago, and such is his dominance of the Russian media that the chances of internal protests pressurising, let alone toppling, the 69-year-old president look minimal. The oligarchs may complain if sanctions are placed on them, but Putin is in too deep to retreat. One London-based diplomat said this week after viewing Russia’s televised and cowed national security meeting: “We used to talk about Putin’s inner circle. There is no inner circle. There is only Putin.” Another said: “The only thing that will change Russian public opinion is the mothers of Russia seeing the bodybags.” Nikolai Petrov from the Chatham House thinktank warned “all infrastructure of political opponents and opposition has been destroyed, making it much easier for the Kremlin to to mobilise public opinion”.\nDire predictions by the British of Putin being mired in a battlefield quagmire will now be tested. Many Ukrainians appear on western media to attest that Putin has underestimated Ukraine’s will to fight. They insist they will not tolerate a puppet government loyal to Moscow. But the long queues of traffic fleeing Kyiv in the westward direction speaks to another story. It is as likely that Ukraine’s prisons will be filled with dissidents. In the short term there will be a debate, including in Germany, about whether to arm the resistance, with some Green party and CDU leaders already advocating this. The German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, at the weekend said this was not the moment for Germany to make a 180-degree turn on such a strategic policy. Yet the debate is live. The former German defence minister Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer said: “I’m so angry at us for historically failing. After Georgia, Crimea and Donbas, we have not prepared anything that would have really deterred Putin.” Keir Giles, also from Chatham House, urged the west to be cautious. “Looking at Russia’s 100% success record on suppressing resistance movements in territories it has occupied – often using medieval levels of savagery and inflicting terror on the civilian population – we ask what would aid to a resistance achieve and would it make the situation better worse or better.” The images of destruction in Aleppo, Grozny and Afghanistan show how merciless the Russian military can be. Stoltenberg has said that it is a matter for individual nations to decide the help they provide to any resistance. But the risks are high. In his speech announcing the invasion, Putin warned outsiders tempted to interfere that there would be “consequences you have never encountered in your history” – a chilling veiled reference to nuclear war. There is also a danger that an insurgency would exacerbate a refugee crisis likely to be triggered across central Europe. Plans are in infancy in the EU’s Frontex border agency to prepare for the arrival of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Some diplomats are optimistic that, unlike with Syria in 2015, there will not be a political backlash, pointing out many Ukrainians have already been welcomed to Europe. As many as 15,000 Ukrainians already live in Berlin. But autocrats have learned that refugees are weapons of war. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has clearly indicated that there is a serious risk that Putin, judging by his words, will not stop at Ukraine, but wants to restore Russia’s empire, and remove western forces from all former Warsaw pact countries. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, said Putin had gone “full tonto”, and almost every western politician who returned from Moscow was disturbed by his demeanour and inability to focus on realistic solutions to the crisis. It means once Ukraine is swallowed by Putin, Russia will be able to station forces – land, air and missile – in bases in western Ukraine as well as Belarus, which has effectively lost independence. He may not invade the Baltic states, but he is in a better strategic position to demand a retreat by Nato to Warsaw pact boundaries and a land corridor through Poland to link Kaliningrad, the headquarters of the Russian Baltic fleet. It will mean high defence spending, less dependence on Russian energy and more troops on Nato’s frontiers. Finland and Sweden may seek to join Nato. If Putin wanted less Nato, he may get more. Finally, the west has to confront questions about the validity of the whole postwar diplomatic security architecture. On Wednesday night UN diplomats gathered to condemn Russia at an emergency meeting, one chaired by Russia, this month’s presidents of the UN security council. It symbolised the degree to which the UN has become utterly compromised. But there may have been one diplomatic voice in New York that will disturb the west most – that of the Chinese envoy. In his brief remarks he remained studiously on the fence, refusing to condemn Russia and knowing the west’s anguish may provide it with nothing but opportunities ahead."}, {"id": "uk-news/2022/feb/24/ukrainians-protest-at-downing-street-gates-over-russian-invasion-uk-military-sanctions", "title": "Ukrainians protest at Downing Street gates over Russian invasion", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2022/feb/24/ukrainians-protest-at-downing-street-gates-over-russian-invasion-uk-military-sanctions", "body": "Hundreds of Ukrainians, many clad in their national colours of yellow and blue, have gathered outside the gates of Downing Street in London to protest against Russia’s invasion of their country. While shock, anger and defiance were among the common sentiments, events in the early hours of Thursday morning had also heralded difficult personal dilemmas for many, such as Aleksandra Legosteva, a tech worker, and her mother, Olena, who had come to visit on Saturday. “I don’t want her to go back,” said Legosteva, who told of a largely sleepless night as the family monitored Russia’s invasion and worried about relatives in northern Ukraine who were stockpiling food and other supplies. Like others, she was eager for the UK government to impose “sweeping sanctions” on Russia, while calls for military assistance and British military boots on the grounds were a common refrain among the crowd. Yuriy Yurchuk, 35, a principal singer at the Royal Opera House, said he had been due to perform at Moscow’s Bolshoi theatre in two weeks’ time but that would now not happen. “There’s still a place for talking but there should be a comprehensive response to what is happening in Ukraine, including a military one and also international condemnation. Otherwise what is the UN for?” added Yurchuk.\nUkrainian flags, large and small, were scattered throughout the crowd, along with homemade placards variously condemning Vladimir Putin as a war criminal or drawing a link between his regime and that of the Soviet Union. The bishop of the Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of the Holy Family of London, the Right Rev Kenneth Nowakowski, was among those who had gathered in London. “I don’t want to criticise the British government because we’re grateful for what they’ve done so far but there is so much more that can and should be done now,” he said. “It’s also worth remembering that this is a war that has been going on for eight years now. The rest of the world is now waking up to it and the fact that Putin may not just stop at Ukraine.”\nWhile those gathered were almost entirely Ukrainian, a small group of young Russians working in sectors ranging from IT to fashion were also present, though they declined to give their names – such were their concerns at the consequences of speaking out against Putin. “I literally couldn’t look at my colleagues in the eye this morning,” said one woman, who spoke of a feeling of shame. Away from the protests, other Ukrainians in Britain expressed their shock and anger as they struggled to maintain contact with family and friends fleeing from or sheltering in areas under bombardment. Members of the diaspora described their fear on hearing from relatives in Ukraine that their home towns had been bombed in Russian airstrikes. Tetyana Vovnyanko, who lives in London, said close family who live near the city of Uman, between Kyiv and Odesa, have sought safety in the countryside. “I listened this morning to the news that there were airstrikes and a shell landed in the middle of the town centre and a few people were killed,” she said, adding that her nephew and his family in Kyiv had also moved to the countryside. Vovnyanko, co-founder of British-Ukrainian Aid, which supports people suffering from the armed conflict and humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, added: “I’m extremely worried because initially we thought that the attacks will be mostly towards the eastern part of Ukraine, along the frontline. And we thought that possibly there will be airstrikes on Kyiv, as American intelligence services said.\n“But today we realised that all Ukraine, even relatively distant towns from the frontline, are affected. I had a brief exchange with my PhD supervisor who is living in Odesa. There were airstrikes there and she’s very scared about her life.” Olesya Khromeychuk, director of cultural centre the Ukrainian Institute London, said she spent the night anxiously following reports of Russian attacks across Ukraine. “As we were anticipating, this is all over Ukraine,” she said. “I hear of explosions in my home town Lviv, near the Polish border, which was considered the safest place in Ukraine.” The historian said many of her friends and relatives were trying to get their parents to safety. “None of my friends have left Kyiv yet, although some are trying to get their parents out. Others were in bomb shelters. But people from Berdyansk and Zaporizhia, in the south-east, are trying to leave because it’s been bombed heavily and it’s extremely dangerous to be there.” Petro Kormylo, archivist for the Edinburgh branch of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain, said his relatives in north-east Ukraine had reported skirmishes with invading Russian forces. Kormylo, 71, from Dumfries, said two of his relatives had recently joined the territorial defence force, set up by the Ukraine government in January to help the armed forces resist a Russian invasion. “I think on a paramilitary level or partisan level, you’re going to find Ukrainians fighting in skirmishes everywhere. If you can think back to Northern Ireland, it’s going to be 50 times worse than that.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/living-near-ukraine-share-your-thoughts-on-the-situation", "title": "Living near Ukraine? Share your thoughts on the situation", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/living-near-ukraine-share-your-thoughts-on-the-situation", "body": "Vladimir Putin has ordered Russian forces to attack Ukraine and invaded the country amid warnings from leaders across the world that it could “spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945”. We would like to hear from people living and working in countries near Ukraine about their thoughts on the situation. On Saturday, the Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergi called for stronger military defence of the Baltic states and Poland, amid fears about Russian aggression in the region. If you’re living and working in Lithuania, Poland, Latvia or Estonia, we’d like to hear from you. What are your thoughts on the developments? What is the mood like at the moment? How do you feel about about the future? Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/russia-attacks-ukraine-news-vladimir-putin-zelenskiy-russian-invasion", "title": "Ukraine fighting to stop ‘a new iron curtain’ after Russian invasion", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/russia-attacks-ukraine-news-vladimir-putin-zelenskiy-russian-invasion", "body": "Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said his compatriots are fighting to stop “a new iron curtain” falling across the country after Russian forces launched a huge and long-dreaded invasion that has sparked fears of the biggest war Europe has seen since 1945. Minutes after the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, ended weeks of agonised speculation by announcing a “special military operation” at dawn on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. Ukraine’s interior ministry reported that the country was under attack from cruise and ballistic missiles, with Russia appearing to target infrastructure near major cities including Kyiv, Kharkiv, Mariupol and Dnipro. Zelenskiy responded to the invasion by declaring martial law and saying Kyiv would issue weapons to every Ukrainian who wanted to defend their country. As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. “What we have heard today are not just missile blasts, fighting and the rumble of aircraft,” he said. “This is the sound of a new iron curtain, which has come down and is closing Russia off from the civilised world. Our national task is to make sure this curtain does not fall across our land.” By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory. Military sources in Ukraine said 20 Russian helicopters and Mi-8 aircraft had landed paratroopers at Hostomel airport in the Kyiv region, where forces from both sides were fighting for control. They said Ukrainian forces had killed 50 Russian troops, destroyed four Russian tanks, and downed six Russian planes and four helicopters. Zelenskiy also said Ukrainian forces were fighting to prevent Russian troops capturing Chernobyl. It was later reported that the Russians now held the former nuclear plant. The early hours of the invasion appeared to have claimed dozens of civilian lives in Ukraine. According to the authorities, 18 people were killed in a missile attack in the southern Odesa region, six people were killed in the town of Brovary, near Kyiv, and four people were killed and 10 injured after an “occupier’s shell” hit a hospital in the city of Vuhledar in Donetsk.\nWith air raid sirens sounding over the capital and residents of Kharkiv sheltered in the city’s metro – scenes not seen in those cities since 1941 – Ukraine’s foreign minister also urged the world to wake up. “Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine,” said Dmytro Kuleba. “Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.” Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, told the Guardian that multiple ground invasions were taking place on several fronts. “There are thrusts taking place,” said Zagorodnyuk. “They are quite close to the city of Kherson now. The situation is really critical there. They are also trying to surround Kharkiv. It seems like Kharkiv at the moment is the main target. They also try to get to Kyiv using one battlefield group.” In a bid to justify the attack, Putin claimed in his TV address: “A hostile anti-Russia is being created on our historic lands.”\n“We have taken the decision to conduct a special military operation,” he said, in what amounted to a declaration of war. He claimed it was for the “demilitarisation and denazification” of Ukraine, echoing a theme of Kremlin propaganda, the false claim that the Kyiv government is controlled by the far right. “We do not intend to occupy Ukraine,” he said, and he had a chilling warning for other nations. “To anyone who would consider interfering from the outside: if you do, you will face consequences greater than any you have faced in history. All relevant decisions have been taken. I hope you hear me,” he said. As Putin’s words were being broadcast and the first detonations were being reported, the UN security council was holding an emergency session, chaired by Russia itself, which holds the rotating presidency. It was begun by the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who made a direct appeal: “President Putin, stop your troops from attacking Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have already died.”\nThe US president, Joe Biden, issued a written statement saying: “The prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces. “President Putin has chosen a premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering,” Biden said. “Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring, and the United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way. The world will hold Russia accountable.”\nOther world leaders also condemned the invasion. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson said: “I am appalled by the horrific events in Ukraine and I have spoken to President Zelenskiy to discuss next steps. President Putin has chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction by launching this unprovoked attack on Ukraine. The UK and our allies will respond decisively. “We will hold the Kremlin accountable,” wrote Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the EU Commission, which had announced fresh sanctions against Moscow only hours before the attack. The stage for the offensive was set on Wednesday night, after the leaders of the two Russian-controlled territories in eastern Ukraine sent an official request to Moscow for military aid to “help repel the aggression of the Ukrainian armed forces in order to avoid civilian casualties and a humanitarian catastrophe in the Donbas”. Zelenskiy used a video address to appeal to the Russian public for help after an attempt to speak to Putin was unsuccessful. “Do Russians want wars? I would very much like to answer this question. But the answer is up to you,” he said. He also vowed to defend the country, saying: “If someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves. By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces.” Military analysts said they expected Putin to send his forces to capture or surround Kyiv. There were reports in Russian state media that airborne troops had captured the airport in Boryspil, near the capital. The Russian military claimed that all of Ukraine’s aviation bases were disabled in the barrage of missiles that began the invasion.\nSmoke rose from near major airfields outside Kharkiv and other cities in the east. But Russia also appeared to have hit airfields in Kherson and as far west as Ivano-Frankivsk, which is nearer to the border with Poland. It indicated its forces had entered Ukraine, claiming Ukraine’s border forces were “not putting up any resistance to Russian units”. Some of the first explosions after Putin announced the operation were heard near Kramatorsk, the headquarters of the Ukrainian army’s operations near the Russian-controlled territories in south-east Ukraine. Russia appeared to be targeting military infrastructure in its early strikes on Thursday morning. Explosions were also reported at military headquarters, and at military warehouses. The dramatic escalation of the crisis is the second time Moscow has launched a significant military incursion into Ukraine since the country gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. In 2014, Putin ordered undercover Russian soldiers to seize the Crimean peninsula, which Moscow then annexed. Thursday’s attack was preceded by a massive, continuous cyber-attack that targeted Ukraine’s ministries and banks, a form of hybrid warfare to sow confusion. In previous weeks, Putin built up an estimated 190,000 troops close to Ukraine’s borders while European leaders shuttled between Kyiv and Moscow, seeking a diplomatic solution. The Russian military claimed it was not targeting population centres. “High-precision weapons are disabling the military infrastructure, air defence facilities, military airfields and aviation of the Ukrainian army,” the Russian defence ministry said in a statement carried by RIA Novosti, a state-run news agency. Military analysts questioned whether Russia could sustain the bombardment and believed a ground invasion was likely. “Russia has a very effective aerial, naval and ground fires capability but it lacks large stockpiles of precision-guided munitions, which is why a ground offensive appears to have begun soon after the first strikes. Russia has every incentive to move as fast as possible,” wrote Rob Lee, a senior fellow in the Foreign Policy Research Institute’s Eurasia Program. The Russian rouble fell to a record-low level since 2016 as Putin announced the military operation. Trading was halted on the Russian stock market. The US is likely to announce new sanctions against Russia, using tools to punish Russian banks and its larger financial system that Washington had so far held in reserve. Biden said: “I will meet with my G7 counterparts in the morning and then speak to the American people to announce the further consequences the United States and our allies and partners will impose on Russia for this needless act of aggression against Ukraine and global peace and security.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/kyiv-furious-as-eu-wavers-on-banning-russia-from-swift-payment-system", "title": "Kyiv furious as EU fails to block Russia from Swift payment system", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/kyiv-furious-as-eu-wavers-on-banning-russia-from-swift-payment-system", "body": "The EU faced furious remonstrations from Kyiv as Europe’s leaders held back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia, even as the Kremlin lay siege to Ukraine via land, air and sea. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his anger shortly before EU heads of state and government decided against blocking Russia from an international payments system through which it receives foreign currency. With casualties mounting, Kuleba warned that European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they failed to impose the heaviest toll on Moscow by cutting Russia from the Swift payments system. “I will not be diplomatic on this,” he tweeted. “Everyone who now doubts whether Russia should be banned from Swift has to understand that the blood of innocent Ukrainian men, women and children will be on their hands too. BAN RUSSIA FROM SWIFT.” With Russian military forces seemingly ready to storm Kyiv, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy had a “frank” message for EU leaders as he joined their summit via video on Thursday evening. Appealing for the harshest measures against the Kremlin, he told them that he may not be able to speak to them again given the military situation. Later Zelenskiy claimed that Russian assassins were in the Ukrainian capital and that both he and his family were on a kill list.\nThe Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (Swift) is used by over 11,000 financial institutions to send secure payment orders and is key to the movement of funds to Russia’s oil and gas sector. Removing Russia from the system, it is argued, would make it close to impossible for financial institutions to send money in or out of the country, with consequences for both the country’s oil and gas sector and its European customers. A number of member states believe there is nothing to be gained from waiting, a position shared by the UK government. Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, admitted that “many colleagues pleaded for it” but he told reporters that “more work needs to be done to assess what happens if Russia is cut off”. During a call with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, had urged allies to react with the harshest measures, warning that “western inaction or underreaction would have unthinkable consequences”. UK sources said Johnson had also made a major play for leaders to withdraw Russia’s access to Swift during his G7 speech to other world leaders. Canada’s Justin Trudeau was the only other leader to express support for finding a way to enforce the ban. “On Swift, I think we all recognise that it is something that has to be done in conjunction with our major allies and will only be successful if that can be achieved as such, we are continuing those discussions,” Johnson’s spokesman said. “There are a range of views on it and we recognise it is a challenge. But it is certainly the prime minister’s intention so we will continue to have those discussions.” The Irish taoiseach Micheál Martin said his government also supported “the strongest possible sanctions”. Lithuania’s president Gitanas Nausėda, said the EU needed to learn the lessons that the bloc’s previous sanctions had been “too weak”. “We cannot have the luxury of being a discussion club,” he said. “Discussions are useful but we cannot forever be in discussions ... They need our support today, tomorrow might be too late.”\nPoland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki said that the EU had to be united around severe sanctions “on Putin, on Russia” if Europe was to be relevant around the world. “This is now a critical moment for the history of the European union, the history of Europe,” he said. “The whole free world is looking at us, at what kind of sanctions, what kind of reactions” Diplomatic sources suggested that Germany, Cyprus and Italy were among the member states who were the most concerned about taking the measure at this stage, arguing that some leverage needs to be maintained. “Someone started a war and we want this war to stop here and now,” one EU diplomat explained of the caution over Swift. “You always need to have some doors open to be able to have a dialogue to stop a war.” The diplomat added that the measures that did have unanimous support within the EU would “be much more effective with high cost and consequences than doing one single issue on Swift, which might be needed for things which are very relevant for some EU member states.” Later, Scholz confirmed that he was opposed to cutting Russia off from the international payments system. He said: “It is very important that we agree those measures that have been prepared, and keep everything else for a situation where it may be necessary to go beyond that.” The fissure in the united front with Ukraine came at what was seen by many as one of the most testing summits for a generation, with the bloc’s capacity to strike convincingly at Russian interests in question.\nIn the early hours of Friday morning, at the end of the summit, European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU had agreed on measures that would degrade Russian industry, push its economy into recession and block exports of irreplaceable components. She said: “This package includes financial sanctions that cut Russia’s access to the most important capital markets. We are now targeting 70% of the Russian banking market, but also key state-owned companies, including the field of defence. “These sanctions will increase Russia’s borrowing costs, raise inflation and gradually erode Russia’s industrial base. We are also targeting the Russian elite by curbing their deposits so that they cannot hide their money anymore in safe havens in Europe.” Von der Leyen said an export ban on components for Russia’s oil sector would make it “impossible for Russia to upgrade its oil refineries, which gave actually Russia export revenues of €24bn in 2019”. “The third topic”, she said, “is that we ban the sale of all aircrafts, spare parts and equipment to Russian airlines. This will degrade the key sector of Russia’s economy and the country’s connectivity. Three quarters of Russia’s current commercial air fleet were built in the European Union, the US and Canada. And therefore, they are massively depending on that.” Finally, Von der Leyen said the EU would be “limiting Russia’s access to crucial technology … such as semiconductors or cutting-edge technologies.” Belarus will also be subject to a sanctions package that has yet to be prepared for its role aiding Russia’s invasion from its territory. But a consensus on the need for a major package of sanctions across the financial and energy sectors was marred by a lack of support for what many regard as the most damaging of actions, both for Moscow and European countries with the closest trading ties to Russia. Those opposed - dubbed the “incrementals” – were said to be pushing to hold back from imposing the most onerous measures. Officials suggested that Swift may be held back as part of a “third tranche” of sanctions. It is argued by some diplomats in Brussels that Russia could find ways around being blocked from Swift and that the other measures would be just as significant in squeezing the Kremlin."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/putin-russian-president-ukraine-invasion-mental-fitness", "title": "Decision to invade Ukraine raises questions over Putin’s ‘sense of reality’", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/putin-russian-president-ukraine-invasion-mental-fitness", "body": "Vladimir Putin’s decision to launch a catastrophic new European war, combined with the sheer weirdness of his recent public appearances, has raised questions in western capitals about the mental stability of the leader of a country with 6,000 nuclear warheads. They worry about a 69-year-old man whose tendency towards insularity has been amplified by his precautions against Covid, leaving him surrounded by an ever-shrinking coterie of fearful obedient courtiers. He appears increasingly uncoupled from the contemporary world, preferring to burrow deep into history and a personal quest for greatness.\nThe French president, Emmanuel Macron, is well-placed to analyse changes to Putin’s demeanour. Macron once drove a cooperative, if self-conscious, Putin round the gardens of the palace of Versailles in a tiny electric golf cart in the summer of 2017 and welcomed him to his holiday residence at a fortress on the Mediterranean coast the following summer, where Putin descended from a helicopter carrying a bunch of flowers and complimented the Macrons on their tans. After Macron held five hours of talks with the Russian leader in Moscow at opposite ends of a 15-metre table, he told reporters on the return flight that “the tension was palpable”. This was not the same Putin he had last met at the Elysée palace in December 2019, Macron said. He was “more rigid, more isolated” and was off on an “ideological and security drift”. Following Putin’s speech on Monday, an Elysée official made an unusually bold assessment that the speech was “paranoid”. Bernard Guetta, a member of the European parliament for Macron’s grouping, told France Inter radio on Thursday morning, after military invasion began: “I think this man is losing his sense of reality, to say it politely.” Asked by the interviewer if that meant he thought Putin had gone mad, he said “yes”. Guetta is not alone. Milos Zeman, the Czech president and long one of Vlaldimir Putin’s staunchest supporters, denounced Putin a “madman” after the invasion. “All our Russia-watchers, watching his press conferences, think that he’s descending even more into a despotic mindset,” another European diplomat said. Vladimir Ashurkov, a close aide of Alexei Navalny, Putin’s most prominent opponent who is now in a penal colony, described Monday’s rambling speech by the Russian president about Ukraine as “really bizarre”. “It’s unprecedented in the rhetoric of world leaders, but also for Russia. It’s quite strange,” said Ashurkov, who is executive director of Navalny Anti-Corruption Foundation, and lives in exile. “Why would you spend so much time, you know, looking back into the past, when we now live in the 21st century? We should be looking into the future. It puzzles me as to what audience is intended for such a speech, because it’s not going to resonate with Russians and it’s rubbish for an international audience.” “I think he’s in some sort of self-induced concept of reality that is very revanchist, based in the past, and in the trauma of the dissolution of Soviet Union,” he said. “Frankly speaking, we are in a situation where the leader of a major nuclear country is living in his own world.”\nAccording to an estimate by the Federation of American Scientists (FAS), Russia has 5,977 nuclear warheads, even more than the US, its own rival in that field. Putin frequently refers to that huge arsenal, and made a thinly veiled reference to them when he launched the war on Ukraine. He said: “Whoever would try to stop us and further create threats to our country, to our people, should know that Russia’s response will be immediate and lead you to such consequences that you have never faced in your history. We are ready for any outcome.” Nato’s North Atlantic Council responded with similar open-ended language, saying: “We have increased the readiness of our forces to respond to all contingencies.” The US and Nato have made it very clear that they will not intervene directly in Ukraine, but their forces are in ever closer proximity and they have vowed to keep sending arms to Ukrainian forces if they become a guerilla resistance to Russian occupation. An errant Russian missile hit a Turkish-owned cargo ship in the Black Sea off the coast from the port city of Odessa on the first day of fighting. There have already been close encounters between Russian and Nato planes, while their naval forces will brush alongside each other. Ukraine has asked Turkey to close the Dardanelles Strait to Russian warships, to stop them moving from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea. Putin could also see the Nato provision of weapons, or certain types of sanctions as strategic threat, and respond in an unpredictable way. Emma Claire Foley, a researcher at Global Zero, a disarmament advocacy group said she worries about “the risks of having all these troops, all this materiel, in close proximity plus the sort of the ambiguity that an actual war introduces for people who are trying to understand the meaning of the other side’s actions, especially when communication is limited.” Hans Kristensen, director of FAS’s nuclear information project, said that any unintended clash would have to go through several phases of escalation before nuclear weapons would be contemplated, but he cautioned: “If a direct clash happened, that escalation to that point could happen quickly. “It doesn’t necessarily have to go according to plan.” In a crisis, it would be very much up to Putin how to react and whether to escalate. Like a US president, he has access to a nuclear briefcase, the Chegets, with nuclear launch code. According to an analysis by the Middlebury Institute for International Studies at Monterey, the defence minister and chief of staff of the armed forces are also supposed to be involved, but in Putin’s Kremlin it is unclear whether they would act as any kind of brake on his actions. “Nuclear weapons are an interesting exception to the general rule that the psychology of world leaders is less important than the systems they work in,” Foley said. “Don’t assume that this could proceed in an orderly fashion. It could spin out of control very easily.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/ukraine-russia-flee-country-invasion", "title": "Thousands of Ukrainians flee country after Russian invasion", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/ukraine-russia-flee-country-invasion", "body": "Thousands of Ukrainians have left the country and as many as 100,000 are internally displaced after fleeing their homes following the attack ordered by Vladimir Putin, the UN refugee agency has said. Videos and photos on social media show lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west, as well as an increase of people on foot near the southern and western borders. The United Nations refugee agency said on Thursday that the situation was quickly deteriorating after Russia’s invasion, estimating that several thousand had already fled with more expected to follow. It appealed to neighbouring countries to keep their borders open to people seeking a safe haven. “We have already seen reports of casualties and people starting to flee their homes to seek safety,” said Filippo Grandi, the UN high commissioner for refugees. At the Luzhanka border crossing with Hungary in western Ukraine, hundreds of cars waited in a queue snaking more than 2 kilometres back from the border on Thursday afternoon. People said they had been waiting over six hours in line to cross. A steady stream of people crossed on foot, carrying suitcases and holdalls stuffed with belongings. Many were Ukrainians from the Hungarian minority that live in the west of the country, and said they were traveling to stay with relatives for a few days in the hope the danger would pass. Others had come from other parts of Ukraine and planned to drive on to Western Europe. “The people who have money are leaving,” said one of the customs officials at the post. He said over 1,500 people had left through the crossing by 4pm on Thursday, as opposed to just a few hundred on a normal day. One 19-year-old man from the town of Svyalava said he had left both because he was scared of Russian assault and of potentially being called up to the Ukrainian army. “My brother lives in Hungary and I’ll stay with him as long as it takes,” he said, waiting at the border post. He asked not to use his name. Others also said they were fleeing before receiving army call-ups.\nPeople carrying luggage and accompanied by children crossed into the Polish city of Medyka, and lines of cars stretching for miles were reported on the approach to Ukraine’s border with Moldova. For weeks, central European countries on Ukraine’s western border have been making preparations for a potential influx of millions of refugees. Authorities in the countries next to Ukraine have already identified border crossings through which people can leave the country by land, such as Vyšné Nemecké in Slovakia, Záhony in Hungary, Siret in Romania, and Palanca in Moldova. Maia Sandu, the president of Moldova, said on Thursday there was an increase in traffic flow on the border. Poland is preparing a train, with medical equipment, to transport wounded civilians from the Ukrainian border to Polish hospitals, said the country’s health minister. “We are preparing a sanitary train with full rescue service and medical equipment to transport the injured,” said Adam Niedzielski. “This solution was created completely from scratch and, so far, has not been used in Poland. At the same time, we already have a list of 120 hospitals throughout the country to which victims may go. In total, we estimate at the moment that it would be possible to admit several thousand patients.” Poland, in particular, has been preparing for various scenarios, including a wave of up to a million people fleeing Ukraine, said Maciej Wąsik, the deputy interior minister. Poland is already home to about 2 million Ukrainians, many of whom moved after the 2014 conflict, and they have taken advantage of a relatively easy scheme to gain work permits. The government has said it is planning to house Ukrainian refugees in hostels, dormitories and sports facilities.\nA few days ago, local authorities in the countries bordering Ukraine were asked to indicate the list of accommodation facilities for refugees, the number of people it would be possible to accommodate, the costs involved and the timeframe for the adaptation of buildings. The ground floor of the exhibition centre in the south-eastern Polish city of Rzeszów has been equipped to receive people who may flee Ukraine, about 30 miles to the east.\nGermany has said it will offer support to countries in eastern and central Europe, especially Poland, facing an influx of refugees. German media have cited estimates that between 200,000 and a million people may flee to the EU from Ukraine in the event of a war. “We will offer massive support to the affected states – especially our neighbour Poland – in the event of large refugee movements,” the interior minister, Nancy Faeser, said in a statement, adding she had been in touch with the Polish government and the European Commission. Franziska Giffey, the mayor of Berlin, told news outlet RBB 24 that the German capital was preparing for the arrival of refugees. “For next week, we have set ourselves the goal of discussing concrete implications, what preparations we can make, especially in the event of people fleeing this situation,” Giffey said. Other countries in Europe have offered support to countries in eastern Europe in case of a wave of refugees leaving Ukraine. António Costa, the prime minister of Portugal, said potential refugees from Ukraine were welcome in the Iberian country, home to a large Ukrainian community. “Ukrainian citizens who have family, friends and acquaintances here are welcome in Portugal,” Costa said, promising to facilitate the issuance of entry visas."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/airstrikes-dawn-russia-begins-war-aggression-with-ukraine-vladimir-putin", "title": "Airstrikes at dawn as Russia begins ‘war of aggression’ with Ukraine", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/airstrikes-dawn-russia-begins-war-aggression-with-ukraine-vladimir-putin", "body": "It began an hour before dawn, airstrikes and missiles raining down on military bases, airfields, border posts and cities across Ukraine, explosions lighting up the still-darkened sky from Odessa to Mariupol, Kharkiv to Dnipro, Lutsk to the capital, Kyiv. In the grey early light that followed, Russian tanks and troops began rolling across the border, columns of soldiers pouring into the eastern regions of Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Luhansk. Others landed in the ports of Odessa and Mariupol. In Moscow, shortly before 5am, Vladimir Putin had announced the launch of the biggest attack by one state against another in Europe since the second world war. “I have decided,” he said, “to conduct a special military operation.” The assault, the Russian president said, was aimed at “the demilitarisation and denazification of Ukraine”, and any foreign country that tried to interfere risked “consequences you have never seen”.\nBarely an hour later, at 5.58am in Kyiv, as explosions rattled the city and sirens blared, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, tweeted: “Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes.” This was “a war of aggression”, Kuleba said. “Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.” Minutes afterwards the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, addressed his nation in a tense video, saying explosions were now being heard “in many cities across the country”. He declared martial law. On the overnight train from the south-eastern port city of Mariupol to the capital – the last, perhaps, to make the journey for some time – passengers woke up to news from the now besieged city they had left behind. There was an air of grim calm; no shouting or weeping, no explosions of emotion. People flicked through their phones, watched snatches of video showing shelling; held long, subdued conversations with those now stuck behind the frontline and wondering what they should do next. The south and east were not the only regions of Ukraine under attack; reports soon began coming in of an armoured incursion, backed by Belarusian troops, through the Senkivka border crossing in the north, as well as of Russian armour moving into Ukraine from Crimea.\nBy 7am, two hours into the assault, Russian-backed separatist rebels were launching multiple attacks on Ukrainian military positions around the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in the south-east. Video footage showed Russian rockets hitting populated areas in major cities, despite Moscow’s claims that it was only targeting military infrastructure; pictures from Kharkiv showed the tail section of an unexploded rocket sticking out of the pavement close to an Orthodox church. Russia has amassed more than 150,000 combat troops on the borders of Ukraine, with another 34,000 lightly armed separatist forces in the self-proclaimed republics: an estimated two-thirds of the country’s total ground forces. Half its air force is also deployed in the region. As Europe awoke, leaders denounced the assault, warning of heavy casualties and a huge economic impact. Financial markets opened – and instantly plunged. Oil prices soared. Governments convened emergency meetings and readied new sanctions.\nIn Kyiv, a city of three million people, the city’s mayor, Vitaly Klitschko, urged residents to stay at home unless they were involved in critical work and to prepare go-bags with necessities and documents in case they needed to evacuate. Some headed underground, seeking refuge in the metro. With reports suggesting Russian tanks were advancing on Kyiv from Belarus, barely 93 miles (150km) and two and a half hours’ drive and away, others hurriedly packed suitcases and took to trains, cars and buses; main roads leading out of the city started to back up from mid-morning. “We are facing a war, and horror. What could be worse?” said one resident, Liudmila Gireyeva, 64. She said she was planning to travel later in the day to the western city of Lviv, and then to try to move on to Poland to join her daughter. Putin “will be damned by history”, Gireyeva said. “Ukrainians are damning him.” As the train from Mariupol pulled into Kyiv, only an hour late, at 11am, those on board tumbled out into a city reeling from the start of hostilities few believed would reach such a terrifying scale. The station was crammed with people desperate to get on a train out – in almost any direction but eastwards.\n“My parents called me around 5am to say war is coming and I didn’t believe them,” said Anna Bolosheva, 27, taking a train to stay with relatives in a rural area to the north of Kyiv. “I opened the news and there wasn’t much about it – but then I heard the explosions. I couldn’t imagine it, and I can’t understand it. Yesterday I didn’t think this could happen.” Eight hours’ drive and 340 miles (550km) to the west, in the city of Lviv, near the Polish border, the queues for banks and pharmacies and supermarkets were already snaking round the block.\nLviv had long seemed one of Ukraine’s safer cities, prompting several western embassies concerned about a possible Russian invasion to relocate there from Kyiv, but morning air raid sirens and news of Russian strikes in Lutsk to the north and Ivano-Frankivsk to the south had punctured that illusion. Glued to his phone was Ivan Taibov, 27, from Odessa. His screen showed video of a plume of smoke rising from his home city. “They’re calling for people to come to its defence,” he said. “I’m trying to see if it is possible to get back. There will be a fight.” Tanya Hrunyk, a 43-year-old economist waiting in one of the bank queues, was wondering whether to stay in Lviv and for how long. “I have family in the country where I could go. I’ll go if there’s an evacuation. Until then, I’m not sure,” she said. Asked what she thought of Putin’s reasons for attacking her country, Hrunyk said sharply: “He’s a crazy man. He’s mentally ill. Our task is to stay calm and united.” Ivan Borislavsky, a bartender who is expecting a baby with his partner in a month, said he was staying. “I need to fight for my wife and children and my land,” he said. Ukrainian officials confirmed video footage from several sources of a Russian helicopter assault at Hostomel, barely four miles from Kyiv. At least 20 Mi-8 and Ka-52 helicopters flew in from Belarus to attack an airfield that is home to the Antonov aircraft maker and has a runway long enough to handle big cargo planes.\nBy lunchtime, casualties were starting to mount: 18 dead in a missile attack near Odessa, according to authorities; six more in Brovary, half an hour’s drive north-east of Kyiv. In Vuhledar, near Donetsk, an occupier’s shell hit the hospital, killing four people and injuring 10, including six doctors. Russia’s military claimed to have wiped out Ukraine’s air defences; Ukraine’s to have shot down five Russian aircraft and killed 50 soldiers on the eastern front. In Mariupol, in the far south-east, close to Russian-occupied territory, Yulia, a local journalist, said she had heard multiple heavy explosions on the opposite side of the city from the western Primorsky district where she was with her young son. “We’ve collected our stuff and are ready to run to a bomb shelter if necessary,” she said. But she added she was worried because she could not reach her mother, who lives in the eastern part of the city, by phone. “I hope it’s just because her phone battery has run out,” she said.\nIn Kherson, east of Odessa, Svitlana described a column of Russian tanks, APCs, military trucks and rocket launchers moving inexorably north in the direction of Nova Kakhovka. “We are just sitting in our houses,” she said. “The shops are closed, nothing is working.” There was shelling earlier, but now it was quiet. Nearly 560 miles away in Moscow, banks and exchange bureaux opened for business but rapidly ran out of dollars as the Russian rouble plunged to an all-time low. Despite a barrage of state media propaganda, many residents expressed profound shock that Russia should have launched a full-scale attack on its neighbour. “I didn’t think Putin would be willing to go all the way. How can we bomb Ukraine? We have our disagreements, but this is not to a way to solve them,” said one appalled Muscovite, Ksenia Fadeeva. Another, Nikita Golubev, said: “I am embarrassed for my country. To be honest with you, I am speechless. War is always scary. We don’t want this.” Tatyana, who asked for her surname not to be published, said she “couldn’t believe the news I read this morning. A war with Ukraine? What are we doing? I feel powerless.”\nOrdinary citizens were not alone. Valery Meladze, arguably Russia’s most popular singer, posted an emotional video in which begged Russia to stop the war. “Today something happened that should have never happened. History will be the judge of these events. But today, I beg you, please stop the war,” he said. By 2pm, Andriy Zagorodnyuk, a former Ukrainian defence minister, was describing a situation that was still “extremely tense. There are thrusts happening. They are quite close to Kherson; the situation is critical there. They are trying to surround Kharkiv. Ukrainian armed forces are fighting quite seriously. There is no panic.” Shortly after, Ukraine called on the EU to urgently provide air defence and anti-missile systems, as well as use “all means” to jam Russian satellite signals, requesting an “end to business as usual” with Russia and “fierce measures against Belarus, which directly supported Russia’s full-scale invasion”. Russia’s defence ministry, meanwhile, claimed about 12 hours into the attack to have destroyed 74 Ukrainian military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems.\nBack in Kyiv, the capital’s central railway station, Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi, was crowded with hundreds of passengers seeking to leave. There were long queues for tickets and information. Several trains had been cancelled, marked red on the departure board, but others were functioning as normal. By 6pm, there were still huge queues of cars trying to escape the capital and head westward, with the main road out jammed with vehicles. Drivers stood next to their vehicles, patiently waiting for the route to clear. Mayor Klitschko ordered a 10pm-7am curfew but said metro stations would stay open all night for shelter. As darkness began to draw in at the end of the first day of what analysts have said may prove Europe’s fiercest conflict for more than 75 years, Zelenskiy turned to an earlier dark era, and a celebrated phrase from the end of that war. “What we have heard today are not just missile blasts, fighting and the rumble of aircraft,” the Ukrainian president warned. “This is the sound of a new iron curtain, which has come down and is closing Russia off from the civilised world. Our national task is to make sure this curtain does not fall across our land.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/we-dont-want-this-russians-react-to-the-ukraine-invasion", "title": "Thousands join anti-war protests in Russia after Ukraine invasion", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/we-dont-want-this-russians-react-to-the-ukraine-invasion", "body": "Vladimir Putin has said there is broad public support for the invasion of Ukraine that he announced just before dawn on Thursday morning. But by evening, thousands of people in cities across Russia had defied police threats to take to central squares and protest against the military campaign. Police had made at least 1,702 arrest in 53 Russian cities as of Thursday evening, according to the OVD-Info monitor, as they cracked down on the unsanctioned protests. Most of the arrests were made in Moscow and St Petersburg, where the crowds were largest. The protesters chanted: “No to war!” as they exchanged shocked reactions to the attack on Ukraine.\nIn Moscow, Alexander Belov said he thought that Putin had “lost his mind”. “I thought that we would never see a war like this in the 21st century,” said Belov, who arrived early at Moscow’s Pushkinskaya Square to find it surrounded by police vans. “It turns out we live in the Middle Ages.” The mood in Moscow was dark and sombre hours after Putin had announced that he was launching a broad military offensive targeting Ukraine. “I am embarrassed for my country. To be honest with you, I am speechless. War is always scary. We don’t want this,” said Nikita Golubev, a 30-year-old teacher. “Why are we doing this?” His anger and hopelessness were shared by many commuting to work down central Arbat Street. At the Ukrainian culture centre just down the road, the mood was even grimmer. The Ukrainian administrator said the centre, which aims to promote the language, traditions and identity of a country Vladimir Putin denied the legitimacy of as a modern state in his speech on Monday, would be shut for the “coming period”.\n“We are being bombed as we speak. Of course we are closed! Jesus, what is happening?” the administrator, who did not want to give his name, shouted. There were already signs that Russians were uncomfortable with Putin’s initial decision to recognise the two self-proclaimed republics in Donbas. On Tuesday, Yuri Dudt, one of Russia’s most popular media personalities, said he “did not vote for this regime” and its need for an empire, and felt ashamed, in a post that received almost a million likes in 24 hours. A fresh poll by the independent Levada Center released on Thursday showed that only 45% of Russians stood in favour of the recognition move that preceded Thursday morning’s dramatic events. “I didn’t think Putin would be willing to go all the way. How can we bomb Ukraine? Our countries have their disagreements, but this is not a way to solve them,” said Muscovite Ksenia.\nBut outcries of anger were not only felt on the streets of Moscow, where the Guardian did not encounter support for the military assault. Russia’s cultural and sporting elite, usually firmly behind Putin and often called upon by the president during election campaigns to gather popular support, also expressed their deep worries about Russia’s invasion. Valery Meladze, arguable the country’s most beloved singer, posted an emotional video in which he “begged” Russia to stop the war. “Today something happened that should have never happened. History will be the judge of these events. But today, I beg you, please stop the war.” Likewise, Russian football international Fyodor Smolov posted on his Instagram channel: “No to War!!!”\nUS intelligence has for months warned that Russia would seek to fabricate a major pretext before launching an invasion of Ukraine. In the end, no major false flag came, and experts now believe that Putin decided to act without gathering the backing of his own electorate. “Putin seems totally indifferent to approval on the street. He’s acting not like a politician in need of public support, but like a figure from national history books who cares only about the approval of future historians and readers,” tweeted Alexander Baunov, a political analyst at the Carnegie Moscow Center. The Russian leader looked to have also surprised some of Russia’s most prominent oligarchs, who saw their wealth tumble as the country’s financial markets collapsed. Just on Monday, after Putin recognised the independence of the two Donbas territories, Oleg Deripaska, a Kremlin-friendly oligarch who once said that “he does not separate himself from the Russian state”, exclaimed on his Telegram channel that “war had been averted”. He has since deleted the post.\nOn Russian state television, the invasion was framed as a defensive mission aimed at preserving Russian lives. “What’s the point of a major first strike? However strange or cynical it sounds, it’s actually humane because it allows everyone around to prevent a large massacre. By immobilising Ukraine, life is being preserved,” said pundit Vladislav Shurygin on the Channel One programme Vremya Pokazhet.\nSome risked arrest on Thursday evening in order to voice their opposition to the invasion. Zhargal Rinchinov from Buryatia arrived on the square in a jacket with the inscription: “No to war.” If he held up a sign, he said, he would be arrested. “Everyone is scared,” he said. “They know if they say something bad then they’ll be put in jail. So people pretend they don’t notice we have started a war, so they don’t have to speak up about it.” For Ukrainians, public messages of opposition to the war will come too late. The country has said that at least 40 soldiers have already been killed and many more civilians injured, as it is threatened with being overrun by a much larger military force. Yet, sensing that a genuine large-scale pushback against war might be Ukraine’s best bet, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Ukraine’s president, on Thursday morning urged Russians to speak up. “If the Russian authorities don’t want to sit down with us to discuss peace, maybe they will sit down with you.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/boris-johnson-announces-largest-ever-set-of-sanctions-against-russia", "title": "Boris Johnson announces ‘largest ever’ set of sanctions against Russia", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/boris-johnson-announces-largest-ever-set-of-sanctions-against-russia", "body": "Boris Johnson has said it is time to “squeeze Russia from the global economy, piece by piece,” as he announced a wide-ranging sanctions package against Moscow, including freezing the assets of all major Russian banks and banning hi-tech exports. “Putin will stand condemned in the eyes of the world and of history: he will never be able to cleanse the blood of Ukraine from his hands,” the prime minister told MPs as he announced the swingeing package of measures. Pointing to sharp declines in Russian stock markets and the value of the rouble since the invasion of Ukraine, Johnson said, “we will continue on a remorseless mission to squeeze Russia from the global economy piece by piece, day by day and week by week.” He had earlier tried and failed to convince fellow G7 leaders to shut Russia out of the Swift global payments system, though his spokesperson said he would continue to press the issue in the coming days. Johnson announced 10 measures the UK was taking immediately. The assets of all major Russian banks in the UK will be frozen, including VTB, the country’s second largest bank with assets totalling £154bn.\nIndividual sanctions will be imposed on over 120 individuals, entities and subsidiaries, including Rostec, the country’s biggest defence company, which exports £10bn in arms a year, as well as four other defence companies. Legislation is expected be tabled next week to ban major Russian companies from raising finance on UK markets and to prevent Moscow from raising sovereign debt in London. Oligarchs who will be sanctioned include Putin’s former son-in-law Kirill Shamalov, Russia’s youngest billionaire; Denis Bortnikov, the deputy chair of VTB Bank’s management board; and Yury Slyusar, the director of the United Aircraft Corporation. The Russian airline Aeroflot will be banned from landing in the UK. A diplomatic source said: “These are people who have international lifestyles. They come to Harrods to shop, they stay in our best hotels when they like, they send their children to our best public schools, and that is what’s being stopped. “So that these people are essentially persona non grata in every major western European capital in the world. That really bites.”\nThe UK will suspend and prohibit all dual-use export licences to Russia, which covers items that could have civilian or military use. There will also be legislation to prohibit a wide range of hi-tech exports to Russia, including semiconductors, aircraft parts such as Rolls Royce jet engines, and oil refinery equipment. Number 10 said it would set out more detail in the coming days about new legislation to limit the deposits that all Russian nationals can hold in UK bank accounts to £50,000, intended to choke off the ability of Russians to raise finance and keep their money in London. The measures will also apply to Belarus, which Russian forces have used to invade Ukraine. The government will also bring forward the economic crime bill, before Easter recess, aimed at making assets more transparent. Labour leader Keir Starmer said his party would support the measures, saying the public would face “economic pain,” as a result, but “the British public have always been willing to make sacrifice to defend democracy on our continent and we will again”.\nJohnson had faced criticism from across the political spectrum earlier this week for introducing sanctions that many MPs, including in his own party, felt were too weak. Responding to Johnson’s statement on Thursday, former prime minister Theresa May said “every possible economic sanction” should be levied on Russia so it “absolutely feels the cold wind of isolation” and understood it had become a “pariah state”. Jeremy Hunt, the former Tory foreign secretary, said economic sanctions would not go far enough and that a “fundamental review of our military capability” was needed, as well as a revisiting of the “out of date” Integrated review of the UK’s defence policy. Some Conservative MPs called for the UK to increase military aid to Ukraine, including the former cabinet minister David Davis, who said the UK should consider providing air support to the Ukrainian armed forces. Davis said that even the most “ferocious sanctions … are no longer a deterrent, they are a punishment” and that the invasion of Ukraine meant Vladimir Putin had “effectively declared war on the west”. Full list of planned sanctions 1. An asset freeze on all major Russian banks, including VTB, the country’s second largest bank, which has assets of £154bn. 2. Legislation will be introduced to parliament on Tuesday that will prohibit the ability of all major Russian companies to raise finance on UK markets, and for the Russian state raise sovereign debt on UK markets. The aim is to pass the legislation in one day. 3. A set of individual sanctions on over 100 individuals, entities and subsidiaries, when also counting the measures unveiled on Tuesday. The new targets include the Russian state-owned defence giant Rostec, its subsidiaries, and a group of oligarchs seen as particularly close to the Kremlin. These are: Kirill Shamalov: Russia’s youngest billionaire and Vladimir Putin’s former son-in-law. Petr Fradkov: head of Promsvyazbank, one of the banks sanctioned, and the son of the former head of Russia’s FSB intelligence service. Denis Bortnikov: deputy president and chair of VTB bank. Yury Slyusar: head of Russia’s United Aircraft Corporation. Elena Georgieva: board chair of Novikombank. More people will be named in the weeks to come. The individuals will be banned from all UK transactions – meaning those with children in UK private schools will be unable to pay future fees. Relatives will not, however, be sanctioned personally. 4. Immediately ban the ability of Russian airline Aeroflot to land in the UK. 5. An immediate suspension of all dual-use export licences to Russia. This covers items that could have a civilian or military use, such as electrical components and truck parts. 6. In the coming days, legislation to prohibit a wide range of hi-tech exports, and the export of equipment connected to extracting oil and gas. This is being done in concert with the US.\n7. Looking into a way to limit the amount of deposits Russian nationals can hold in UK bank accounts. The details have to be decided, and also whether this will cover dual nationals. 8. A plan to work with allies to shut off Russia’s access to the Swift international banking system. This would have a major impact, but can only be done effectively if other countries agree. 9. Extending the full range of sanctions to Belarus, given the integration of the nations’ military forces. 10. The UK’s economic crime bill, which will strengthen areas such as unexplained wealth orders, will be brought forward. On Wednesday Boris Johnson had told MPs the bill would not be brought to the Commons this parliamentary session."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/war-ukraine-kyiv-map-where-has-russia-attacked", "title": "War in Ukraine: where has Russia attacked?", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/war-ukraine-kyiv-map-where-has-russia-attacked", "body": "Russia’s attack on Ukraine began at about 5am local time, with multiple missile and air raids and a three-pronged invasion from the north, east and south that appeared to be targeting the capital, Kyiv, and the cities of Kharkiv and Kherson respectively.\nHostomel airbase As of Thursday evening, a fierce battle for the strategic airbase close to Kyiv appeared to be continuing after Russian helicopters and airborne troops attempted to establish a bridgehead outside the city. Videos on social media – among the most dramatic to have emerged since the invasion began – depicted a swarm of Russian Ka-52 and Mi8 helicopters descending on the Antonov military airfield.\nUkraine said it had downed three helicopters in the initial assault, but a lunchtime report from CNN showed Russian forces in control of at least some of the base. Shortly after, however, Ukraine’s armed forces chief said Kyiv’s forces were fighting back in a critical early battle. Justin Bronk, of the Rusi thinktank, said if airborne assault troops could take and hold the airbase, the Russians could use it to rapidly build up forces ahead of heavy ground troops to put pressure on the capital. “However, it’s high risk because until ground forces link up, the airborne assault forces are deep in Ukrainian territory and dependent on aerial resupply, casualty evacuation and fire support,” he said. Chernobyl and the north A Ukrainian presidential adviser said Ukraine had lost control of the Chernobyl nuclear site in the north, where fighting raged after Russian troops crossed the border from Belarus. The adviser said authorities did not know the current condition of the facilities at the site of the world’s worst nuclear disaster. Ukraine’s interior ministry warned that if artillery fire was to hit waste stored after the 1986 disaster, it could lead to “radioactive nuclear dust” being spread “over the territory of Ukraine, Belarus and the countries of the EU”. The Chernobyl exclusion zone lies directly in the path of what western experts believe is the principal invasion route from Belarus to the west of Kyiv, where Ukraine’s presidential palace and key buildings are located. Russian troops also advanced from the north on the city of Chernihiv. One axis of advance appears to have centred around the Senkivka border crossing to the north-east of Chernihiv. Crucial, perhaps, in this calculation is the fact that south of Chernihiv – which lies to the east of the Dnieper river – lies the E95 highway to Kyiv.\nKharkiv and the east A substantial attack appeared aimed towards the eastern city of Kharkiv, which has a population of more than 1 million. Multiple reports from Kharkiv described explosions nearby – while Ukraine’s defence ministry said mid-morning that “fierce fights” were taking place in that area.\nAndriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, said Russian forces were trying to surround Kharkiv. “It seems like Kharkiv at the moment is the main target,” he said. Kherson and the south Russian forces heading north into Ukraine from Crimea were not meeting any obvious resistance, at least initially. Border guards released security camera footage on Thursday showing a line of Russian military vehicles crossing into Ukraine’s government-held territory from Russian-annexed Crimea.\nSocial media footage appeared to show Russian forces reaching the city of Kherson on the Dnieper, 80 miles (130km) inside Ukraine. Shortly after, around lunchtime, the presidential adviser said fierce fighting was taking place there. Film posted online was said to show Russian helicopters over the nearby Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant. Russian forces had also moved north-eastwards from Crimea to Melitopol, where the presidential adviser said they would meet resistance. Zagorodnyuk said: “They are quite close to the city of Kherson now. The situation is really critical there.” Missile strikes Air and missile strikes appear so far to be mostly focused on military targets, including an air defence site in the frontier down of Mariupol, the Ukrainian naval base in Ochakiv and an arms depot in Kalynivka, 124 miles (200km) south-west of Kyiv, according to the defence intelligence specialists Rochan Consulting.\nRussia’s defence ministry said its forces had destroyed 74 “objects of above-ground military infrastructure”, though this could not be confirmed. The US said it believed Russia launched 100 missiles and used 75 aircraft in the first wave of bombing. Casualties Information on casualties has been hard to verify, though on Thursday evening Ukraine’s health minister said 57 people had been killed and 169 injured. Ukraine’s armed forces earlier reported that at least 40 soldiers had died. The Ukrainian presidential adviser said up to 10 civilians had been killed. The mayor of Mariupol said three civilians had been killed there and emergency services in Kharkiv said a boy had been killed after shelling struck an apartment building. The local administration in Odesa said 22 people had died in a strike on a military base. How the militaries compare Russia has amassed more than 150,000 combat troops on the borders of Ukraine, with a further 34,000 lightly armed separatist forces in the pro-Russian self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk. That amounts to an estimated two-thirds of Russia’s total ground forces. Half of Moscow’s air force is also deployed in the region. Ukraine’s forces are considerably smaller. It has a regular army that numbers 125,600, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, but has mobilised reserves of at least 36,000.\nSome of the Russian ambition has been aimed explicitly at demoralising Ukrainian civilians with the reach of the offensive. While much of the initial barrage was aimed at the east of Ukraine, so far, more sporadic strikes on cities in the west, from Uman to Lutsk and Ivano-Frankivsk, seem designed to demonstrate the reach of Russian weapons."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/russia-has-invaded-ukraine-what-we-know-so-far", "title": "Russia has invaded Ukraine: what we know so far", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/russia-has-invaded-ukraine-what-we-know-so-far", "body": "Minutes after Vladimir Putin ended weeks of agonised speculation by announcing a “special military operation” at dawn on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. According to Ukrainian officials, the initial wave of strikes appeared to involve cruise missiles, artillery and airstrikes, which struck military infrastructure and border positions, including airbases. Russian troops have entered the country from the north, east and south, seemingly targeting the capital, Kyiv and the cities of Kharkiv and Kherson respectively. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, responded to the invasion by declaring martial law and saying Kyiv would issue weapons to every Ukrainian who wanted to defend their country. As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory.\nThousands of Ukrainians are already on the move and leaving the country, with tens of thousands more preparing to flee, after the Russian attack ordered by Vladimir Putin. Videos and photos on social media show lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west, as well as an increase of people on foot near the southern and western borders. Joe Biden ordered broad new sanctions targeting four Russian banks, oligarchs and high-tech sectors. The US president also said 7,000 additional troops would be deployed to Germany. “Putin is the aggressor,” Biden said. “Putin chose this war, and now he and his country will bear the consequences.” The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the “largest ever” set of economic sanctions on Russia, including pushing to end Russia’s use of the Swift international payment systems, freezing assets of all major Russian banks, limiting cash held by Russian nationals in UK banks, and sanctioning more than 100 individuals and entities. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his anger as EU heads of state and government appeared to hold back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia. With casualties mounting, Kuleba warned that European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they decided against blocking Russia from the Swift system, through which it receives foreign currency."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/canada-ukrainian-community-russia-invasion", "title": "‘A knot in my stomach’: Canada’s Ukrainian community shaken by Russia invasion", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/canada-ukrainian-community-russia-invasion", "body": "News of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has shaken members of Canada’s Ukrainian community, the largest diaspora population outside of Ukraine and Russia. “I have a knot in my stomach. I can only imagine what it’s like for people in Ukraine who are living with the shelling,” said Taras Kulish, a Toronto-based charity lawyer and member of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. “We’re all concerned and there’s a definitely a shock factor in processing it.” Announcing new sanctions on key Russian figures, Justin Trudeau on Thursday condemned the “horrific, unprovoked attack” on Ukraine. “We stand united and steadfast in our support of Ukraine’s sovereignty,” the prime minister said. “And we stand in solidarity with the Ukrainian people’s right to decide their own future in a free and democratic state.” Canada’s sanctions will target wealthy Russians, large banks and members of the Russian security council, including the defence minister, the finance minister and the justice minister. Canada will also halt export permits to the country. The deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland, who is of Ukrainian descent, said Russian president Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine placed him in the ranks of the “reviled European dictators” who caused mass death and carnage in the 20th century.\nAt times speaking in Ukrainian, Freedland also called on fellow members of the Ukranian Canadian community to show strength and to support loved ones affected by the war. “The Ukrainian people, like all people, must be free to determine their own future,” she said. “We know that the people of Ukraine … are fighting for us too. They are fighting for democracy and we stand with them.” Canada’s new sanctions comes after it previously pledged C$500m (US$780,770) in financial support Ukraine C$7.8m worth of lethal equipment and ammunition. For Ukrainian Canadians, news of the invasion has been devastating. A number of organizations across Canada are quickly raising funds for relief projects, organizing rallies and assisting those with families affected by the war. The prairie province of Alberta announced it would donate C$1m to the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, a recognition of the large diaspora population in the region– and the long history Ukrainian residents have farming the area. Kulish, who works closely with humanitarian organizations in Ukraine, says colleagues on the ground have described the surreal experience of shelling near their homes and the constant worry of loved ones. “I’ve been checking in with colleagues telling them we’re here. We’re praying for you. We’re looking to see what we can do in response. We’re trying to give them that knowledge that people are concerned about them and who love them,” said Kulish. “But you can’t imagine what it’s like. It’s almost unfathomable.” For the last eight years, Kulish has been involved in work providing trauma therapy clinic’s in the country’s eastern region. “We’ve been living this for the last seven years, so in one way, we’re terribly prepared for it.”"}, {"id": "us-news/2022/feb/24/us-uk-intelligence-russian-invasion-ukraine", "title": "US and UK intelligence warnings vindicated by Russian invasion", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/feb/24/us-uk-intelligence-russian-invasion-ukraine", "body": "It was in early November that US president Joe Biden took the rare step to dispatch CIA director Bill Burns to Moscow. The spy chief’s message – in part – was to warn his Kremlin counterparts that the West was concerned about unusual troop movements it was seeing near Ukraine’s border.\nBritish officials were anxious, too. “We keep on coming back to crises over Ukraine,” one said later that month. “President Biden does not send Bill Burns to Moscow unless he is very worried about something. And so, you know, without being able to go into the full details, there is enough substance to this to make us concerned.” A few days later, in early December, the Washington Post reported that US intelligence had found that the Kremlin was “planning a multi-front offensive as soon as early next year involving up to 175,000 troops”, from the north, east and south.\nThe intelligence warnings continued into January, increasingly to the irritation of Kyiv, whose president Volodymyr Zelenskiy complained that acute tensions with Russia were nothing new. “We have been in the situation for eight years,” he said at the time, referring to the start of the 2014 war with Russian-backed separatists. At the time, some were considered outlandish. Britain warned that Russia was contemplating a coup plot, involving four exiled politicians, while the US said plans were afoot to create a pretext for an invasion using a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack. It turned out that Russia did try to create false pretexts, but with none of the production values – or credibility – the US warning implied. The debacle of the buildup to the war in Iraq, where claims of weapons of mass destruction turned out to be baseless, has hung over US and UK agencies for two decades. This time, unfortunately, their warnings about Vladimir Putin’s intentions have proved uncannily accurate."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/ukraine-fights-for-its-survival-as-putin-presses-forward", "title": "Ukraine fights for its survival as Putin presses forward", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/ukraine-fights-for-its-survival-as-putin-presses-forward", "body": "Ukraine was fighting for its survival after Vladimir Putin unleashed a punishing offensive on the country that left hundreds dead or injured, and world leaders warned that Moscow had embarked on a dangerous new era of imperial expansion. The continent awoke to the shock of scenes it once believed it had left in the 20th century: helicopters strafing homes outside the capital, long lines of tanks ploughing ever deeper towards Ukraine’s heartland, roads choked with refugees, and civilians huddled in underground stations to escape bombardment. The west scrambled to respond with a range of new sanctions against Moscow, with the US also announcing it would send 7,000 more troops to Germany to shore up Nato’s eastern borders. But even after the invasion there were divisions on the strength of the response, as Russian forces advanced undeterred by the threats.\nWith ferocious fighting on multiple fronts, Putin’s ultimate war aims were not entirely clear, but they appeared to be ambitious. Russian airborne forces descended on a military base at Hostomel, just outside Kyiv, with the possible objective of forcing open a pathway to the capital. US secretary of state, Antony Blinken said that “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten Kyiv”. “We believe Moscow has developed plans to inflict widespread human rights abuses – and potentially worse – on the Ukrainian people,” Blinken told a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Russian troops were also clearly attempting to cut off Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second city, with a population of nearly 1.5 million, in the east.\nUkrainian authorities said one Russian column had seized control of the Chernobyl nuclear plant, the site of Europe’s worst environmental disaster in 1986, and an emblem for many Ukrainians of the incompetent despotism of rule from Moscow. Mykhailo Podoliak, an adviser to the head of the president’s office in Kyiv, admitted it was “impossible to say” whether the site, where the remains of its radioactive reactor core lie buried, was safe. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the US was “outraged” by credible reports that staff at the plant were being “held hostage” by Russian forces. “This unlawful and dangerous hostage-taking, which could upend the routine civil service efforts required to maintain and protect the nuclear waste facilities, is obviously incredibly alarming and gravely concerning. We condemn it and we request their release,” she said. The port city of Mariupol, which lies between the two regions of Ukraine already occupied by Russia, Crimea and the Donbas in the east, was also reported to be under heavy fire. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, declared martial law and pledged that his government would arm every Ukrainian willing to defend their country. In a late-night address, he said that 137 people had died in fighting, and claimed that Russia had named him “target number one.” As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. “What we have heard today are not just missile blasts, fighting and the rumble of aircraft,” he said. “This is the sound of a new iron curtain, which has come down and is closing Russia off from the civilised world. Our national task is to make sure this curtain does not fall across our land.” Many of Putin’s keenest observers had thought the Russian leader would hesitate before ordering an all-out land war to subjugate Ukraine because of the potentially catastrophic consequences for Russia as well as Ukraine, but he proved them wrong. While Russia was chairing an emergency session of the UN security council that was tasked with finding a way out of the crisis the Kremlin had engineered, Putin broadcast a declaration of war he had recorded three days earlier, underlining the futility of the global diplomatic efforts to dissuade him.\nThe US and Europe sought to inflict punitive measures on his regime with the aim of ensuring that Putin’s war of choice became his worst strategic blunder, by crippling the Russian economy. “Putin’s aggression against Ukraine will end up costing Russia dearly economically and strategically,” Joe Biden warned. “We will make sure of that. Putin will be a pariah on the international stage.” Biden said he was sending 7,000 more troops to strengthen Nato’s eastern borders, expelling Russian diplomats, imposing sanctions on Russia’s two largest banks and almost 90 financial institution subsidiaries around the world. Asked if the invasion marked the start of a new cold war, Biden replied: “That depends. It’s going to be a cold day for Russia.” At the same time, the UK announced its “largest ever” set of economic sanctions on Russia, freezing assets of all major Russian banks and limiting cash held by Russian nationals in UK banks and sanctioning more than 100 individuals and entities. However, clear divisions remained among western countries, with the US and European allies concerned about the global economic ramifications of some of the stronger sanctions. Biden admitted for example that exclusion from the Swift global electronic transactions system was not in the present package of sanctions. It was not, Biden said, the “position that the rest of Europe wishes to take”. Nor did the sanctions announced on Thursday include restrictions on Putin himself. The omission of Swift sanctions enraged the Kyiv government. The foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said that those opposing the move had to “understand that the blood of innocent Ukrainian men, women and children will be on their hands too”. In announcing the sanctions on Thursday, Biden suggested that a wider conflict was possible, given Putin’s aspirations. “He has much larger ambitions than Ukraine. He wants to reestablish the former Soviet Union – that’s what this is about,” he said. Late on Thursday, French president Emmanuel Macron called Putin “to demand an immediate halt” to Moscow’s offensive, the Elysee Palace said. The Kremlin, meanwhile, said only that the two leaders had a “serious and frank exchange of views” about Ukraine. In his speeches, Putin has portrayed the Ukrainian government as a mortal threat to Russia, and hinted heavily at his desire for regime change. He claimed that the Kyiv government had ambitions and means to acquire nuclear weapons, and was run by Nazis – claims so outlandish that they triggered questions about the Russian leader’s mental stability. By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory. Military sources in Ukraine said 20 Russian helicopters and Mi-8 aircraft had landed paratroopers at Hostomel airport in the Kyiv region, where forces from both sides were fighting for control. They said Ukrainian forces had killed 50 Russian troops, destroyed four Russian tanks, and downed six Russian planes and four helicopters. Zelenskiy also said Ukrainian forces were fighting to prevent Russian troops capturing the former nuclear power plant at Chernobyl. The early hours of the invasion appeared to have claimed dozens of civilian lives in Ukraine. According to the authorities, 18 people were killed in a missile attack in the southern Odessa region, six people were killed in the town of Brovary, near Kyiv, and four people were killed and 10 injured after an “occupier’s shell” hit a hospital in the city of Vuhledar in Donetsk. Air raid sirens sounded in Ukraine’s major cities, and civilians in Kyiv and Kharkiv sheltered in the cities’s metro stations – scenes that have not been seen in those cities since 1941. Kuleba urged the world to wake up. “Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine,” he said “Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/24/russia-unleashed-data-wiper-virus-on-ukraine-say-cyber-experts", "title": "Russia unleashed data-wiper malware on Ukraine, say cyber experts", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/24/russia-unleashed-data-wiper-virus-on-ukraine-say-cyber-experts", "body": "Cyber experts have identified a new strain of computer-disabling malware unleashed on Ukrainian targets as part of Russia’s offensive, as the UK government and banks said they were on alert for online attacks. Russia was widely expected to launch a cyber assault alongside its military campaign, and the run-up to the invasion of Ukraine was marked by the deployment of “wiper” malware . A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack, which paralyses websites by bombarding them with spurious information requests, also hit Ukrainian government sites. On Thursday, requests for volunteers from Ukraine’s hacker underground began to appear on forums in a bid to help protect critical infrastructure and conduct cyber spying missions against Russian troops, Reuters reported, citing two sources. “Ukrainian cybercommunity! It’s time to get involved in the cyber defense of our country,” one post read. Yegor Aushev, co-founder of a cybersecurity company in Kyiv, told Reuters he wrote the post at the request of a senior defence ministry official who contacted him on Thursday. Aushev’s firm Cyber Unit Technologies is known for working with Ukraine’s government on the defence of critical infrastructure. On Wednesday, ESET Research Labs, a Slovakia-based cybersecurity company, said it had detected a new piece of data-wiping malware on hundreds of machines in Ukraine. ESET said large organisations had been affected, while security experts at Symantec’s threat intelligence team said the malware had affected Ukrainian government contractors in Latvia and Lithuania and a financial institution in Ukraine. ESET has called the malware, which renders computers inoperable by disabling rebooting, HermeticWiper. The NotPetya attack of 2017, which devastated Ukrainian businesses, was a wiper attack that encrypted computers irretrievably and spilled over into other countries, causing $10bn (£7.5bn) of damage worldwide. Alexi Drew, a senior analyst at RAND Europe, a research institute, said cyber offensives carried the risk of escalating rapidly if attacks spill over widely into other countries, although in the case of HermeticWiper the malware does not appear to be self-propogating, whereas NotPetya was able to spread. Further attacks, however, could be different, she added. “There’s a history of cyber-attacks not staying where they’re meant to go. If you look at NotPetya, the splash damage there was significant. There is a danger here of escalation because offensive cyber activity is fundamentally not very good at staying where you put it.” Priti Patel said officials were on alert for cyber-attacks and disinformation campaigns from Moscow. “As we monitor developments, we will be especially mindful of the potential for cyber-attacks and disinformation emanating from Russia,” the home secretary said.\nThe chief executive of Lloyds Bank, Charlie Nunn, said on Thursday the lender was on “heightened alert … internally around our cyber risk controls, and we’ve been focused on this for quite a while”. Preparation for potential cyber-attacks was discussed in a meeting between the government and banking industry leaders on Wednesday, Nunn added. According to Symantec, the wiper attack that hit Ukraine this week had been planned for some time. One Ukrainian organisation suffered an initial hack in December last year that was related to the recent attack. DDoS attacks were also deployed ahead of the military offensive in order to spread confusion, according to the US cybersecurity firm Mandiant. In a DDoS attack, websites are deluged with vexatious requests for information and become unreachable. The targets on Wednesday included the Ukrainian defence ministry and PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank. “It’s not so much the technical disruption, it’s what it does to undermine confidence, like in the financial sector. It gets people quite nervous. It’s more that kind of secondary impact,” said Jamie Collier, a Mandiant consultant, who described a DDoS as akin to stuffing a thousand envelopes through a letterbox every second. However, Dr Lennart Maschmeyer at the Center for Security Studies at the Swiss university ETH Zurich, said Russia’s cyber strategy so far seemed more improvised. “A plausible scenario for more devastating cyber-attacks was that Russia had planned this invasion for a long time, and prepositioned implants across Ukraine’s critical infrastructure in order to cause mass disruptions coinciding with the military invasion. That does not seem to be the case. The cyber operations we have seen do not show long preparation, and instead look rather haphazard,” he said. • The headline and text of this article were amended on 24 February and 3 March 2022 to make clear that this was a malware incident affecting machines, not a virus."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-bombs-and-bureaucracy-thwart-couples-quest-for-uk-spousal-visa", "title": "Ukraine: bombs and bureaucracy thwart couple’s quest for UK spousal visa", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-bombs-and-bureaucracy-thwart-couples-quest-for-uk-spousal-visa", "body": "A British man and his Ukrainian wife spent 12 hours shuttling between cities targeted by Russian bombs on Thursday in a desperate but failed bid to complete her biometric registration for a UK spousal visa. Fozan and Iryna Dar left the central city of Dnipro, where they live, on a midnight train on Wednesday, in a last-ditch attempt to reach the processing centre in Kyiv. Soon after, the city’s airport closed and bombing began, there and in other cities. Their train shuddered to a halt in a distant suburb of the Ukrainian capital as the city was hit by Russian airstrikes. Eventually, the couple decided to get off the train there, pay more for a taxi than they had for the train tickets, and head to the biometric registration centre. When they got there, a handwritten sign on the door said: “Today we aren’t working, sorry for the inconvenience.” They called the embassy, who first said the centre was open, then said there was nothing they could do, as the collection of biometric data had been contracted out. Iryna had originally applied for a UK visitor’s visa two days before the British embassy advised citizens to leave Ukraine, hoping to meet her husband’s extended family after Covid restrictions forced them to have a small wedding. Because the embassy held her passport, the couple could not leave. Fozan studies medicine at a university that has already evacuated many of its international students, but he refused to go without his wife. “There is no way in hell I’m leaving her behind, it’s not up for debate. I have to protect her,” he said. As the situation in Ukraine got more serious, the couple decided to switch their application and ask for a spousal visa. Visitor visas cannot be used for more than six months. As warnings of invasion came, they feared it might not be possible to return to Dnipro for longer than that, and Iryna didn’t want to be in the UK on a restricted visa for an unknown period of time. But the embassy kept her passport and told her that the biometric details collected for her visitor visa could not be used for her latest application, she said. After 10 days of increasingly desperate calls to a consular helpline, her passport was returned on Tuesday and they told to redo her biometric registration in Kyiv. So they bought train tickets that would get them to the Ukrainian capital the first possible day: Thursday morning. “We were woken up on the train at 5am by friends calling, who said they were in hiding in the basement, and the shelling went on for over an hour,” Fozan said. Despite those attacks, and fear of more violence, the couple have decided to return to Dnipro again, because it’s their home, they have family there, and they hope the university where Fozan studies might include them in any further evacuation. As they waited for their train, the couple spent several hours as a kind of unofficial advice bureau to other foreigners milling around the station in desperation after tickets sold out. “People noticed we were speaking English to each other, and I looked Ukrainian, so they asked us for help with things like reading the timetable,” she said. The people they helped included Germans and Pakistanis and a man from Manchester who got trapped when his overnight layover coincided with Russia’s invasion, and his flight out of Kyiv was cancelled."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/how-can-australians-help-the-people-of-ukraine", "title": "How can Australians help the people of Ukraine?", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/how-can-australians-help-the-people-of-ukraine", "body": "Russia’s invasion and bombing campaign in Ukraine has sparked outrage and alarm. Many in Australia watching on from afar are asking how they can help the people of Ukraine. Support local charities There are several Ukrainian charities working on the ground. Caritas Australia has been working with Caritas Ukraine since 2014 to help people affected by the humanitarian crisis, and is providing essential emergency goods including shelter, food relief and cash distributions.\nThe Australian Federation of Ukrainian Organisations – the national peak body for 24 Ukrainian Australian community organisations – is encouraging concerned Australians to donate to the Ukraine Crisis Appeal which has pivoted to supplying urgent supplies to displaced and injured Ukrainians. United Help Ukraine focuses on providing medical supplies and humanitarian aid, and raising awareness of the conflict. Voices of Children aims to help children affected by the war in eastern Ukraine, providing support through art therapy, psychologists, video storytelling and a number of other methods. The Ukrainian Red Cross is also taking donations from abroad to mobilise volunteers and provide resources and support to victims on the ground. Australians can directly donate via the Australian Red Cross appeal. Donations are tax deductible. Save the Children is holding an appeal to support for families in evacuation sites or in villages, to help distribute emergency items such as blankets, medicine and hygiene kits, and to help neighbouring countries including Poland, Romania and Lithuania to support people fleeing Ukraine. CARE Australia is also supporting local partners in Ukraine and neighbouring countries to distribute food, water, hygiene kits and money for supplies, as well as assistance to support the thousands of displaced families. Support local journalism English-language news outlets based in the country, such as the the Kyiv Independent and the New Voice of Ukraine, are covering developments on the ground as the conflict unfolds, using local journalists. The Kyiv Independent says it was created by journalists in order to defend editorial independence. This site on Twitter covers many local journalists in Ukraine. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nAttend an event Hundreds of Australians gathered in Sydney and Adelaide on Friday in support of the Ukrainian community, calling for an end to the occupation. On Sunday 27 February the Australian Federation of Ukrainian Organisations is holding a nationwide vigil – asking Australians to light a candle of peace and upload an image with the hashtag #StandwithUkraine.\nIn Melbourne, the Association of Ukrainians in Victoria is holding a rally in support of Ukraine’s territorial integrity on Sunday 27 February, kicking off at Treasury Gardens at 12.30pm. The march will conclude at Federation Square at 2.30pm, followed by a community gathering over a bowl of varenyky in North Melbourne. Any profits made will be donated to humanitarian aid in Ukraine. Health authorities encourage people to wear masks when unable to physically distance from others."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/friday-briefing-ukraines-battle-for-survival", "title": "Friday briefing: Ukraine’s battle for survival", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/friday-briefing-ukraines-battle-for-survival", "body": "Top story: Signs of ‘fierce resistance’ Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this morning. Ukraine is fighting for its survival today as the Russian offensive against its neighbour continues to escalate. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, confirmed reports of missile strikes on military and civilian targets this morning, while multiple explosions were heard in Kyiv and air-raid sirens sounded across the city. The key Hostomel air base just outside Kyiv is controlled by Ukrainian forces again, but there is heavy fighting going on north-west of the capital. The deputy defence minister has just said that Russian troops will soon be “just outside Kyiv”, but British military experts said Ukrainian forces had provided “fierce resistance across all axes of Russia’s advance”.\nIn a grave address to the nation earlier on Friday, Zelenskiy said 137 Ukrainians have died so far and although he said he was “target number one” of the Russian military, he would stay in Kyiv. Here’s what we know so far about the invasion, and you can also follow developments at our live blog and read our visual guide to what’s happening. Zelenskiy lamented the lack of on-the-ground military support, with the west’s response only to impose more sanctions. Some EU states are reluctant to go so far as to cripple Russia’s economy by excluding it from the Swift system of dollar payments, so the bloc may not endorse the plan, bringing fury from Ukraine. Boris Johnson has promised tough action as well. In Russia, police arrested more than 1,700 people after protests against the invasion in 53 cities. The question of why Putin has pursued such a reckless path is being asked by governments all over the world, and bewilderment about the Russian leader’s “despotic mindset” has been amplified by his bizarre justifications about “denazifying” Ukraine. Our team of correspondents take us through the tense buildup and then the unleashing of Russia’s military might on the first day of the invasion, which also included a carefully chosen list of targets and “data-wiper” cyberattacks. Ukraine has now called on hackers to help defend against more cyber warfare. Our columnist Timothy Garton Ash, an expert on eastern Europe, writes that the invasion will change the continent for ever, while a Ukrainian journalist in Kyiv shares her disbelief that the attack went ahead. And Oliver Bullough argues that Johnson’s claims that Britain is rooting out Russian money are wide of the mark. * * * Student inequality – Plans to reform student finance in England will result in wealthy undergraduates being better off, while women, disadvantaged students and those from the north and Midlands are most likely to be worse off, according to the government’s own equality analysis. Under the proposals, students who enrol in 2023-24 would make loan repayments for 40 years rather than 30. It means that graduates who end up earning more over their careers would see their lifetime repayments fall, while those making less would see theirs increase by 150%. * * * Blocking move – Social media users could be cut off from other accounts on platforms such as Twitter if they do not sign up for ID verification, under proposals to tackle anonymous trolls. Sites including Twitter, Facebook and Instagram will be required to give users the option to opt in or opt out from receiving messages, replies and content from unverified or anonymous accounts. Verified users could also block unverified or anonymous accounts from seeing their content under the opt in/opt out proposals. * * * Rape failings – Rape survivors who report their attackers are being systematically failed by the criminal justice system, resulting in an average wait of nearly two years before a trial begins, a damning official report has found. A joint inspection by police and crown prosecution watchdogs has identified multiple failings in the process from reporting a rape to a possible trial and conviction of an assailant. A lack of collaboration between police and prosecutors has led to months of delays and poor communication with accusers. * * *\nLong way round – Theft of London hire bikes, dubbed “Boris bikes” after their introduction by the then London mayor, has been increasing. But the end destination of the stolen bikes has thrown up surprises with the list including Australia, Gambia, Turkey and Jamaica, a freedom of information request has revealed. Today in Focus podcast Our correspondents join Michael Safi to discuss the Russian invasion of Ukraine and fears it could escalate into the most serious conflict Europe has seen since the second world war.\nLunchtime read: Peter Sarsgaard – ‘I find comfort in acting’\nPeter Sarsgaard may star in The Batman, but his taste is more arthouse thrillers and experimental theatre. He discusses overacting, bad accents – and being cast as a charmer by his wife, Maggie Gyllenhaal. Sport The four-times world champion Sebastian Vettel has issued a strident call for Formula One to abandon this season’s scheduled race in Russia after its invasion of Ukraine. This season’s Champions League final will be moved from St Petersburg, but pressure remains on football to respond even more strongly as the crisis in Ukraine escalates. On the field, a wild night at Ibrox featuring two goals for James Tavernier and a bizarrely ruled-out effort by Ryan Kent ended in a 2-2 draw as Rangers dumped favourites Borussia Dortmund out of the Europa League 6-4 on aggregate. Mikel Arteta said Alexandre Lacazette “behaves like someone who wants to stay with us” after the striker made a vital contribution to Arsenal’s dramatic late Premier League victory over Wolves. After Sarina Wiegman’s England team won the Arnold Clark Cup, our writers address key questions in the buildup to July’s Women’s Euros. Novak Djokovic’s run of two consecutive years as the undisputed tennis No 1 has come to an end after he suffered a shock defeat to Jiri Vesely in their Dubai quarter-final. Russia’s Daniil Medvedev is set to overtake the Serb on Monday. Leeds will have to defy history if they are to win the Super League title after labouring their way to a third successive defeat – a 10-4 loss to Catalans Dragons – to start the new season. England have been dealt a colossal blow before Saturday’s crunch Six Nations match against Wales with Manu Tuilagi ruled out by a hamstring injury – just hours after he was recalled to the side by Eddie Jones. Greg Norman, who is fronting a Saudi Arabia-backed breakaway golf league, has warned the head of the PGA Tour “it certainly is not the end” despite a string of high-profile players shunning the scheme. Business Financial markets are still absorbing the blow from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with commodities prices soaring amid the uncertainty. Brent crude oil, which yesterday went above $100 a barrel for the first time since 2014, was on the rise again on Friday with a 2% lift to $101.20. The FTSE lost nearly 4% yesterday but looks set to recover at least 1% of that this morning. The pound is on $1.343 and €1.197. The papers\nThe Guardian’s front page has the stark headline “Putin invades” and carries a picture of a wounded civilian woman that features on many fronts. “Her blood … his hands” says the Mirror, while the Sun goes with “Her blood on his hands”. The Mail reports “Putin to seize capital in days”, the FT has “Putin’s forces storm Ukraine” and the Telegraph says “New cold war as Putin strikes”. The Express splash head is “Redrawing map of Europe in blood”, Metro says “War in Europe”, as does the Press and Journal in Scotland. The i has “Ukraine’s agony” and the Northern Echo says “Our worst fears have come true”. See more front pages from around the world at our papers wrap here. Sign up\nThe Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/putin-facing-efforts-isolate-diplomatically-ukraine", "title": "Effort under way to challenge Russia’s right to seat on UN security council", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/putin-facing-efforts-isolate-diplomatically-ukraine", "body": "An effort is under way to isolate Vladimir Putin diplomatically by challenging Russia’s right to a permanent seat of the UN security council on the grounds that Russia took the seat from the defunct Soviet Union in 1991 without proper authorisation. Diplomats are also looking to see if there is a basis for removing Russia from the presidency of the council. The presidency rotates monthly between the 15 members of the security council, allowing the office holder to shape its monthly agenda and to chair its meetings.\nThe Russian envoy Vassily Nebenzias was chairing an emergency meeting of the security council in New York on Wednesday night as Putin announced his assault on Ukraine. Nebenzias started reading out a text sent to his phone by the Kremlin justifying the attack. He maintained the fiction that an invasion was not under way but instead a special military operation had begun in the Donbas. Most council members condemned Russia, one of the five permanent security council members, with the UN secretary general António Guterres taking the rare step of accusing Russia of being in breach of the UN charter. A draft security council motion, condemning Russia and calling for its unconditional withdrawal, is being negotiated behind the scenes in New York and will probably be debated on Friday, but Russia as a permanent member will use its veto. The Ukrainian ambassador to the UN, Sergiy Kyslytsya, told Wednesday night’s meeting that article 4 of the UN charter says the UN is open only to peace-loving states that accept the terms of the charter. He said Russia’s actions showed it could not comply with those terms.\nBut he also asked Guterres to distribute to the security council the legal memos written by UN legal counsel dated 19 December 1991 that the Russian Federation be permitted to join the security council as the successor to the Soviet Union. Ukraine claims the constituent republics of the USSR declared in 1991 that the Soviet Union ceased to exist, and with it should have gone the legal right of any of those entities, including Russia, to sit on the council. No decision to permit Russia to the security council was ever put to the General Assembly. The UN charter was never amended after the USSR broke up. It still references the Soviet Union, and not Russia, as one of the permanent members of the UN security council. By contrast in 1991 China’s entry into the UN was subject to a resolution. A member of the United Nations which has persistently violated the principles contained in the present charter may be expelled from the Organization by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the security council. The Russians claim its actions were taken in line with clause 51 of the charter citing self-defence. The tension between Ukraine and Russia at the Wednesday meeting boiled over at the UN when Kyslytsya at the close of the session looked at his Russian counterpart and said “there is no purgatory for war criminals”, adding “they go straight to hell, Ambassador.” Guterres in a brief televised statement on Thursday said the “Russian military operation is wrong, is against the charter and unacceptable”. He again appealed to Putin to stop the operation and bring the troops back to Russia. The Russian diplomatic delegation is working hard to maintain the protection of China, which has been reluctant to abandon Russia, and would never support a motion for expulsion. But US officials said, “Russia’s aggressive actions here carry risks for China along with everyone else. It’s not in China’s interest to endorse a devastating conflict in Europe and defy the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity it claims to hold dear.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/dasha-saranas-father-left-sydney-for-ukraine-last-week-now-shes-worried-shell-never-see-him-again", "title": "Dasha Sarana’s father left Sydney for Ukraine last week. Now she’s worried she’ll never see him again", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/dasha-saranas-father-left-sydney-for-ukraine-last-week-now-shes-worried-shell-never-see-him-again", "body": "From Sydney, Dasha Sarana calls her dad, Oleksii, in eastern Ukraine. He can hear shelling outside his window – and knows the Russian forces are getting closer. Her friend in a different part of the city texts – they’re trying to get out with their four-year-old child, but there’s no petrol. The WhatsApp goes silent. A different friend in Kyiv calls. No one in their apartment is sleeping. They pacify their toddler with cartoons and constantly check the news. Every now and then, the bomb siren interrupts their shock and they run to the basement, hoping it won’t be their building.\nSarana is worried she’ll never see her father again. At 5am Ukrainian time on Thursday, Oleksii – along with most of the country – woke to news they were being invaded. Within minutes of Russian president Vladamir Putin’s televised address announcing a “special military operation”, they started dropping bombs near major Ukrainian cities. The Ukraine government announced the country was in the midst of “a full-scale invasion” and declared martial law. Oleksii had left Sydney for his home city Sievierodonetsk just a week ago – and like many he didn’t think a real war, a full invasion, was possible.\n“I told him don’t go, but he said ‘don’t worry, we’ll be fine, nothing will happen’,” Sarana said. Oleksii’s mother had died of Covid and he wanted to see where she had been buried. “That’s why he wanted to go,” Sarana said. “He was desperate to go back.” On the phone he is calm, describing how he can hear bombs drop, exploding buildings near him or guns going off. He has prepared his documents and has a visa to return to Australia if he has to flee – but right now getting out of the city is impossible. “They are all just sitting there waiting,” Sarana said. “Getting ready to go to the basement. Everyone is checking the news, social media and what other people are saying in different parts of Ukraine. “Obviously my dad has nowhere to go. We have relatives but they live in the same region, they are in the same situation. There’s shooting everywhere in eastern Ukraine. There’s no safe place to go.”\nWar has returned to Europe, and for those on the doorstop, this moment has become about survival – about waiting it out, one day at a time. “Our other friends, they live in the same city, they were trying to escape,” Sarana said. “They were trying to get petrol, trying to get to friends ... in central Ukraine, but we don’t know if they succeeded. We haven’t heard.” Russian forces are now within kilometres of Kyiv. Normally, the city is vibrant, filled with street vendors, people gathering over coffee and on their way to work. Now it’s quiet. There are cars lined up on major artilleries for kilometres as people desperately try to get out. The ATMs are empty, and the city seems to have run out of fresh bread. But there is booze. “Thank god they still have alcohol,” said Rachel Lehmann Ware from her apartment in Kyiv. Lehmann Ware and her husband are from Huonville, a small town in Tasmania. For the past five years they’ve travelled the world, teaching in international schools. They came to work in Kyiv in July and instantly fell into the rhythm of the city. “You can’t get out of here. The roads are completely blocked there are literally people walking down highways with their suitcases,” Rachel said. “Dfat [Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade] have been telling us for a long time, but we could not get out because we had Covid.”\nAt first they were reluctant to leave their community – Ukrainian families were still sending their children to school, and they needed teachers. When the situation escalated, the couple got Covid. Now they are stuck. “The [Ukrainians] are amazed we are still here,” Rachel said. “I was talking to a parent last week, she said ‘thank you so much for still being in Ukraine’. “I said ‘you are sending your child to school, if you are doing that, I will be here’. At the moment, though, shit is getting real. I don’t know what’s going to happen.” From their apartment, they hear bombs dropping. Loud explosions leave plumes of smoke rising before the horizon. Lehmann Ware admits it’s nerve-wracking talking to media. No one “knows whose going to rule this country next week” and there’s a concern that people who speak out could be punished. “The people here are so wonderful. They just want their freedom,” she said. On Thursday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, urged the estimated 1,400 Australians who remain in Ukraine to leave if they can.\nSome of them have been able to cross the border into Poland. Australian Pixie Shmigel moved with her boyfriend to Ukriane six months ago to immerse herself in her cultural heritage. After Putin declared war and the reports of shelling came through, the pair realised they needed to leave. At 4am she rang her mother, Nadia Mencinsky-O’Keefe, in Sydney and booked an Uber to take them across the border. “The roads were still quiet. She was on the phone to me the whole time,” she said. “We spoke about the sadness and horror – the man that was driving them would have to go back.” Mencinsky-O’Keefe’s grandparents had fled Ukraine during the second world war, on the same roads that her daughter had left just days ago.\n“[She] was fleeing through the border, exactly where my grandparents would have been. History is repeating itself for the Ukrainian nationals in terms of Russia’s aggression. “Post-WW2 we thought the international order would protect us all. I thought this wouldn’t happen again.” Mencinsky-O’Keefe is involved in Australia’s Ukrainian community. She said some had young family members who had signed up to join the militia; they’d written escape plans for their wives and children. “It’s frightening and distressing,” she said. “It’s difficult to believe in 2022 this is what’s happening.” She said she welcomed the sanctions, but wanted to see Australia and the international community do more. “How can Ukraine defend itself against these attacks without substantial military equipment, technical support and medical supplies? We also need humanitarian aid – Ukrainian people are innocent but they will bear terrible suffering and deprivation as a result of this aggression.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/can-germany-function-without-vladimir-putins-gas", "title": "Can Germany function without Vladimir Putin’s gas?", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/can-germany-function-without-vladimir-putins-gas", "body": "The Ukraine crisis has plunged Germany into an intense debate about how it will heat its homes and power its industry in future, summed up in the short question: can Europe’s largest economy function without Vladimir Putin’s gas? The Green federal economics minister, Robert Habeck, answered with a decisive “yes it can”, a day after the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, announced the suspension of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which was meant to deliver from Russia as much as 70% of Germany’s gas requirements. There are considerable doubts as to whether the $11bn project will ever now go ahead. But even before Russian troops invaded Ukraine on Thursday morning, NS2 was just a small part of the wider discussion some say Germany has been far too slow to have. At stake is nothing less than the future of German – and by extension European – energy security. Germany announced its withdrawal from nuclear power after the 2011 Fukushima disaster, and in 2019 said it would pull the plug on coal-fired plants, leaving observers wondering how the country was planning to make its energy policy workable and future-proof. Sceptics have questioned how it made sense for Germany to make itself so dependent on Russian gas when it should be distancing itself from Putin’s autocratic machinery. Until recently, the answer from the top of government was that this was an economic project, not a political one. The robotically repeated mantra now sounds at the best naive, and at the worst, given the current turn of events, a self-defeating decision which has helped fund Putin’s war. Habeck admitted “we face turbulent days ahead”, as he promised on Wednesday that the government would provide relief where necessary to compensate for the expected rise in gas prices. One of the government’s main predicaments is whether it can deliver on its promise to make a switch to renewable energy sources in order to reach its climate goal to become carbon neutral by 2045. Gas is seen as the vital bridge in that endeavour, which, while seen as ambitious by international standards, is viewed by many climate experts as barely adequate. Importing liquified natural gas (LNG) has been viewed as one option as part of a diversification strategy. However, this has been beset by numerous problems – not least the lack of a terminal in Germany necessary to handle LNG imports. Neither would available LNG supplies be able to fully replace Russian gas and it is also an expensive alternative. Gas already comes from Norway, but those supplies cannot be increased as it is already producing to capacity.\nLeonhard Birnbaum, the CEO of Germany’s biggest gas and electricity provider E.ON, said that while energy supplies for this winter were secure, next year could be more of a challenge. “If Russian gas imports were to break down completely, the immediate effect wouldn’t be so dramatic as we’re almost at the end of the heating season. But next winter it could be the case that we’re not able to meet the supply demands of all the industrial customers. Some of them may have to turn off the power. It is utopian to believe that Russian gas can be completely replaced from one day to the next by other sources,” he told Die Zeit. Other critics have said Germany only has itself to blame, having dillydallied on its much vaunted plans to switch from fossil fuels to renewables. A positive headline to emerge from the recent heavy storms which hit much of northern Europe, was the record amount of energy fed into the grid by its wind turbines on Sunday. But it also served to underline how slow the development of renewables has been. Beyond Germany’s borders the short-term answer is thought to be simple: why not reverse the decisions, or at least prolong the use of coal-fired power plants and temporarily restart the nuclear reactors? But these options are seen as politically suicidal in Berlin – in particular the reactivation of nuclear plants (as well as being highly impractical and disastrous from a legal point of view). Opposition to nuclear was the founding principal of the Green party – two of whose former leaders, Habeck and the foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, are now in government. Both have always opposed the pipeline. There is no evidence of ordinary Germans panicking, although heating installation companies say there has been a considerable increase in inquiries about heat pumps from people keen to find an alternative to the gas central heating. “In the short term it won’t be easy to move away from natural gas,” Hans-Martin Henning, the head of the Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems, told Tagesspiegel. “But in the medium term this must be part of the concept of speeding up the energy source switch in the heat sector and wherever possible electrical heat pumps should be used as a way of becoming more independent from natural gas.” Andreas Löschel, an energy economist, told the same newspaper that even before the Ukraine crisis, Russia had destroyed its own narrative about being a reliable provider of cheap gas. “The trust is no longer there,” he said. “Russia has shot itself in the foot”. Just days ago at a press briefing with Scholz in Moscow, Putin heaped praise on Scholz’s fellow Social Democrat Gerhard Schröder, the former German chancellor turned lobbyist for Gazprom, saying he was responsible for brokering generous fuel rates. It was one of Schröder’s final acts in office in 2005 to sign the NS2 deal before he was appointed chairman of the company behind it. On Thursday calls were growing for the government to remove Schröder’s privileges as a former chancellor, including an office and staff, amid reports they cost the taxpayer more than €400,000 (£344,244) a year, on top of his considerable earnings from lobbying for companies including Rosneft and Gazprom. An online petition said a “former chancellor who is financed by autocrats, and makes himself dependent on them, in so doing ridiculing German interests, should no longer be financed by the German taxpayer”. Some politicians called for him to be added to the list of individuals facing sanctions. Writing on the LinkedIn platform, Schröder said although “many mistakes” had “been made on both sides” in the relationship between the west and Russia, Russia’s “security interests did not justify its intervention by military means”. He called on the Russian government to “end the suffering of the people in Ukraine as soon as possible”. He also warned against “cutting the remaining political, economic and societal connections” between Europe and Russia."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/russian-guardian-readers-on-ukraine-invasion", "title": "‘I fear Putin is unstoppable’: Russians on the invasion of Ukraine", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/russian-guardian-readers-on-ukraine-invasion", "body": "Russian forces have attacked Ukraine on the orders of Vladimir Putin who announced a “special operation” at dawn on Thursday. World leaders have denounced the invasion and warned that it could ignite the largest war since 1945. Though many Russians may support their president’s actions in Ukraine, others are against the conflict. A new poll released by the independent Levada Centre showed only 45% of Russians were in favour of Putin’s recognition move that preceded the invasion. There were protests against the war in town and cities across Russia on Thursday night. A Guardian callout asking for Russian views about the situation with Ukraine received scores of submissions from people across the country, though the majority came from respondents living in Moscow. Many of those who contacted the Guardian did so to express their concern over the escalation. Among the submissions were younger Russians who had got in touch to say that they were opposed to their government’s actions in Ukraine, with many emphasising they had family, friends and partners in Ukraine. “Russian youth are devastated by the prospect of war between Russia and Ukraine,” Dmitry, a 21-year-old student in Moscow, said. “All of my friends and I, who live in Moscow and other Russian cities, are extremely scared. No one expected that the war would really break out.”\nI went to sleep about five o’clock [on Thursday morning after watching Putin’s address to the nation]. I spoke to my friend from western Ukraine, as he was discussing the possibility of leaving the country, and when I woke up at nine, I realised it [the attack on Ukraine] had happened.” Dmitry, who was one of more than 150 people who responded to the reader callout, said there was a “clear generational divide”. “I would say that almost all of my friends oppose Putin’s actions. There are numerous posts on social media,” he said. “I fear Putin is unstoppable. This time he’s not concerned about public opinion. There was an overall euphoria [in Russia] after the annexation of Crimea in 2014 but now literally nobody supports the war. People may support Luhansk and Donetsk regions as they’re Russian-speaking but nobody wanted us to invade Ukraine. For the younger generation, we’re worried about what’s going to happen with our future.” Several Russians who got in contact with the Guardian spoke about a lack of desire for conflict and a sense that the government was not representative of its people. Natalia, a 52-year-old teacher in St Petersburg, said: “I am totally devastated about the tragic events unfolding in Ukraine. I know that many people living in Russia experience a deep sense of guilt and shame for the actions and hostile rhetoric of the Russian leaders many of us have never even voted for.” Natalia said that she viewed Putin’s military actions in Ukraine “as an extreme act of aggression and hostility towards an independent country” and believed harsher sanctions should have been imposed in 2014.\nThe teacher said that while some Ukrainians “quite justly” blamed Russians for not speaking out against their government, the crackdown on political protest had intensified in the past decade. Many Russians lived with a “fear of imprisonment, which nowadays, has become a sad reality”, Natalia said, adding: “There’s little resemblance between Russia of 2022 and Russia of 2011 when hundreds of thousands of people took to streets to protest against the rigged elections. However, Russians are not silent – we are being silenced.” Some view the crisis in Ukraine as being fuelled by pressure from the west. Ilya from Sochi believes Putin’s actions are “following the feelings of insecurity” among Russians. “It seems to me that Russian society feels under siege by Nato and the US and feels it needs to defend itself,” he said. “Ukrainian nationalists … want to align Ukraine with the west, while disregarding shared history, cultural and familial ties between nations.” He feels the entire situation is unfair but hopes that a peaceful resolution can be found. Another concern raised was one of the Russian economy and the impact sanctions would have on the country’s citizens. “We’re economically dependent on other countries and apart from the financial hardship caused by the pandemic, we’re still feeling the consequences of the sanctions from 2014,” said Kristina from Kaliningrad.\nShe said with the onset of a war, prices would rise the “regular” citizens of Russia would be affected, not the “oligarchs”. “Our economy is still developing and we are not recovering. These latest sanctions will just make it even worse for everyone,” she said. Kristina spoke about the psychological pressure many Russians were under amid the rapidly escalating crisis in Ukraine. “It’s impossible to overestimate the amount of stress ordinary Russian people are under right now. One of the most stressful things is the rest of the world thinking Russia is evil and that this was the people’s decision. It wasn’t and we are not equal to our leader.” “For a regular citizen it is hard to understand what is true and what is false, who is right and who is wrong,” she said. Kristina said that most people she knew were “harsh critics of Putin’s actions” and sympathised with Ukraine “where some of us have friends and families”, while others were confused by the situation. “What I know for sure is that no one wants any kind of war.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-soldiers-told-russians-to-go-fuck-yourself-before-black-sea-island-death", "title": "Ukraine soldiers told Russian officer ‘go fuck yourself’ before they died on island", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-soldiers-told-russians-to-go-fuck-yourself-before-black-sea-island-death", "body": "Ukrainian soldiers who died defending an island in the Black Sea from an air and sea bombardment reportedly told an officer on board a Russian navy warship to “go fuck yourself” when asked to surrender. There were 13 border guards stationed on Snake Island, a roughly 16-hectare (40-acre) rocky island owned by Ukraine that sits about 186 miles (300km) west of Crimea, when Russian troops bombed the island on Thursday. All 13 soldiers died after refusing to surrender, Ukrainian officials announced. In his address after the first day of the invasion of his country, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced he would posthumously award all of the soldiers the Hero of Ukraine award. “All border guards died heroically but did not give up,” Zelenskiy said. Audio has emerged that is purported to have captured an exchange between Ukrainian border guards on Snake Island and an approaching Russian navy vessel, in which a Russian officer told the Ukrainian forces on the island to “lay down your weapons”.\n“This is a military warship. This is a Russian military warship. I suggest you lay down your weapons and surrender to avoid bloodshed and needless casualties. Otherwise, you will be bombed,” the Russian office was recorded as saying on a naval radio channel. After a short period of silence in the recording, a Ukrainian officer reportedly responded: “Russian warship, go fuck yourself.” The audio has been published by multiple media outlets including the Ukrainian online newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda, and was shared on social media by Anton Herashchenko, an adviser to the Ukrainian interior ministry.\nThe Russian navy is reported to have bombarded the island with deck guns before sending soldiers on board to take control, according to Maritime Executive citing local media reports. Snake Island – known as Zmiinyi Island in Ukrainian – is situated near the Ukrainian and Romanian coasts along the Black Sea, and has previously been the subject of a territorial dispute between the two countries. A marine research station is situated on the island, and its maritime borders take in an area understood to be strategically important for resources including petroleum."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/russia-ukraine-invasion-why-invade-attack-what-we-know-so-far", "title": "Russia’s invasion of Ukraine: what we know so far ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/russia-ukraine-invasion-why-invade-attack-what-we-know-so-far", "body": "Gunfire has been heard in central Kyiv and there are reports of heavy fighting in the city’s northern suburbs as Russian forces close in on the Ukrainian capital. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, called on the Ukrainian army to overthrow the government, describing its leaders as “terrorists” and “a gang of drug addicts and neo-Nazis”. Russia is ready to send a delegation to the Belarusian capital, Minsk, for talks with Ukraine, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. Ukraine has said it is willing to discuss declaring itself a neutral country. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, insisting “no one is planning to occupy Ukraine”, also said Moscow was ready for talks if Ukrainian forces laid down their arms. The EU is preparing to freeze the assets of Putin and Lavrov as part of a third round of sanctions. Amid Ukrainian anger at the bloc’s reluctance to cut Russia out of the Swift international payments system, EU foreign ministers are to approve further measures on Friday afternoon. Russian troops have taken control of Hostomel airfield near Kyiv, according to the defence ministry in Moscow, and the capital’s mayor has said it has entered a “defensive phase”. The defence ministry urged citizens to resist when Russian forces entered Kyiv, telling residents to inform authorities of all troop movements, and “make molotov cocktails and neutralise the enemy”. Guards fired warning shots to prevent a stampede at Kyiv’s central station as thousands of people tried to force their way on to evacuation trains. Explosions rocked Kyiv in the early hours in preparation for the Russian advance, with Ukraine claiming it had shot down a Russian military aircraft over the capital. Officials said a tower block had been set on fire. Russian forces have taken the city of Sumy in north-eastern Ukraine, according to a resident who said there were Russian military vehicles in the streets. Uefa moved the Champions League final from St Petersburg to Paris and Russia was ejected from the Eurovision song contest. Russia banned UK flights from its airspace after the British government said Russia’s national carrier, Aeroflot, would be banned from British airspace as part of the UK’s package of sanctions. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, called for Nato defence support and tougher sanctions against Russia.\nUkraine decreed a full military mobilisation against the Russian invasion. Ukrainian men aged 18-60 are forbidden to leave Ukraine. Zelenskiy has declared martial law. The president said he would remain in Kyiv, despite saying he was Russia’s primary target. “We are not afraid. We are not afraid of anything,” he said. Thousands attempted to flee Kyiv by car, leading to large traffic queues. Pictures have emerged of Kyiv residents crowding into underground metro stations where they are taking shelter from further Russian attacks. Anti-war protests attracted thousands of people in cities across Russia, with local authorities swiftly cracking down on the unsanctioned rallies. Police made at least 1,702 arrests in 53 Russian cities on Thursday night."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/uk-says-it-will-work-all-day-to-persuade-europe-to-cut-russia-off-from-swift-ukraine", "title": "UK says it will work ‘all day’ to persuade Europe to cut Russia off from Swift", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/uk-says-it-will-work-all-day-to-persuade-europe-to-cut-russia-off-from-swift-ukraine", "body": "The UK has said it will work “all day” to persuade fellow European states to cut Russia off from the international Swift payment system. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, ended the pretence that Britain was not at odds with its fellow European leaders over the issue. He said there was still time for Russia to be excluded, and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “The UK is working with allies to exclude Russia from the Swift financial system.” Wallace added: “We will work all the magic, do everything we can in diplomacy.” Truss is to undertake a round of shuttle diplomacy to try to rally support for the British position after the EU refused to adopt what has been billed as the “nuclear option” of sanctions.\nBritish officials said that the EU, reflecting the divisions at its council meeting on Thursday, kept the Swift option on the table. UK diplomats are arguing that with Ukrainian forces mounting a defence of their country, and scattered signs of unease in Russian cities, this is the moment to try to get ahead of Putin for once and surprise him with a move that would send the Russian economy straight into the deep freeze. The British position has the support of Canada and some US senators. British officials insist they will keep up the pressure for the policy even if Kyiv falls. Boris Johnson lobbied the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, on Wednesday on the issue but made no progress. Johnson’s position, also raised at a virtual meeting of the G7, is backed by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. The Swift payment system (the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) is the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, allowing international trade to flow smoothly. It has become the principal mechanism for financing international trade. In 2020, about 38m transactions were sent each day over the Swift platform, facilitating trillions of dollars’ worth of deals. Swift is incorporated under Belgian law and, although supervised by a complex web of central banks, it was forced in 2012 to comply with an EU regulation, as confirmed by its home country government, that had cut Iran off from the banking system. Wallace said: “We would like to go further. We’d like to do the Swift system – that is the financial system that allows the Russians to move money around the world to receive payments for its gas – but … these are international organisations and if not every country wants them to be thrown out of the Swift system, it becomes difficult.”\nOpponents of the move argue that it would incentivise Russia to try to use an alternative fledgling scheme. They also say it would be dangerous for countries highly dependent on Russia for their energy, principally Italy. The Biden administration privately supports the Swift cutoff, but is also focused on maintaining transatlantic unity. Biden highlighted the other swingeing sanctions that the EU had agreed to take, arguing that they were more effective than Swift. He said: “It is always an option, but right now that’s not the position the rest of Europe wishes to take.” Scholz said before an EU meeting to decide on sanctions late on Thursday night that it was important for the EU to hold measures in reserve to punish Russia further. “It’s very important that we decide on measures that have been prepared in recent weeks and reserve everything else for a situation where it is necessary to do other things as well,” he said.\nThe former European Council president Donald Tusk said on Friday that some EU governments had “disgraced themselves” by refusing to impose the toughest possible sanctions on Russia even as Vladimir Putin was bombing Kyiv. The remarkable rebuke by Tusk, who led meetings of the council as president from 2014 to 2019, revealed deep divisions among Europe’s political elite at what is perhaps the continent’s most acute moment of crisis since the second world war. “In this war everything is real: Putin’s madness and cruelty, Ukrainian victims, bombs falling on Kyiv,” Tusk posted on Twitter. “Only your sanctions are pretended [sic]. Those EU governments which blocked tough decisions (i.a. Germany, Hungary, Italy) have disgraced themselves.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/of-course-i-worry-shockwaves-from-ukraine-reach-taiwan", "title": "‘Of course I worry’: shock waves from Ukraine reach Taiwan", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/of-course-i-worry-shockwaves-from-ukraine-reach-taiwan", "body": "About 5,000 miles away from the violence in Ukraine, shock waves from Russia’s invasion are being felt in Taiwan. Until recently, Taiwan was considered to be one of the world’s most significant potential flashpoints for a multination war. It was heralded – albeit with some exaggeration – as “the most dangerous place on Earth”, under growing threat of invasion by Xi Jinping’s China, which considers the independently governed democracy to be a Chinese province. This week its people have watched their fears play out in eastern Europe, as Russian forces – ordered by Xi’s ally Vladimir Putin – attacked in the pre-dawn hours of Thursday. The invasion prompted solidarity from Taiwan. The government proclaimed it stood with Ukraine, and announced unspecified economic sanctions against Russia.\n“The principle of self-determination cannot be erased by brute force,” said Taiwan’s vice-president, Lai Ching-te. It also prompted fear. There is speculation about whether Beijing might use this crisis to make its move, while the world is focused on Ukraine. “China may think about using military action against Taiwan at any moment,” Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, said earlier this month. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, warned “the shock will echo around the world” if Ukraine was endangered, specifically citing Taiwan. On Thursday, Beijing sent nine warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence zone – a slightly larger than average sortie among the near daily incursions of the last two years. On Wednesday, President Tsai Ing-wen ordered Taiwan’s military and national security apparatus to boost its defences, surveillance, and early warning systems, and to strengthen its already sophisticated responses to cognitive warfare. Analysts and China watchers say it is unlikely an attack is imminent. This year is politically sensitive for Xi with a once-in-five-years leadership congress, and Taiwan is both more easily defended than Ukraine and more important – strategically and economically – to world powers such as the US. “The Chinese leadership continues to emphasise that time is on China’s side for cross strait [unification], that trends are favouring China,” says Brookings Institute scholar on China and Asia, Ryan Hass. “That’s an alibi for maintaining the status quo throughout a turbulent year.”\nBut J Michael Cole, a Taiwan-based China expert, warns there is a danger in assuming autocratic leaders like Putin and Xi are making decisions rationally. “The unimaginable is possible, even if, from our perspective, taking action, in this case launching a war of choice despite the threat of major sanctions, seems irrational.” In Taiwan feelings are mixed. The crisis has raised questions about Taiwan’s preparedness and the commitment of its friends. The threat of invasion has loomed for decades, but when the day comes Taiwan will need help to survive, and so people are watching closely how the international community is responding to Ukraine. In the bustle of a Taipei morning market, women are flitting from stall to stall, filling their trolley bags with produce, while sellers shout across the lanes to each other. Bebe, a fruit and vegetable seller, is unloading bags of cabbages from a blue truck onto her bicycle. It is a busy day before the long weekend, but Ukraine is at the top of her mind. “I’m really concerned about it,” she says from behind a wide straw hat and a face mask bearing the flags of Taiwan, the US, Lithuania, and Japan, with the message: “Thank you my friends.” “I don’t know if the US is strong enough to help protect Ukraine, so of course I worry about Taiwan.” Lannie, a 20-year-old student, says she fears that China appears to be helping Russia, and that could mean Russia helps China later on. “I don’t think we will have war today, but now I see everything happening I’m a little bit worried.”\nThe moment is a litmus test for the US, several analysts say. “If the US is perceived as indecisive or incoherent or otherwise indifferent to western Europe’s concern about Russia, then that may diminish western Europe’s intention and willingness to help the US in the Indo-Pacific theatre as well,” says Wen-ti Sung, a political scientist at the Australian National University. Several analysts argue that this week is a wake-up call for all western governments that have been strong on the rhetoric about Taiwan but haven’t yet really had to act. “International volatility is compelling countries to speak out more clearly about the importance they attach to Taiwan security,” says Hass. “To a certain extent events are providing a bit of a catalyst for coordination.” Online, many Taiwanese commenters fear those governments have already shown how far they are willing to go, and it is not enough. “I just hope that the president will strengthen Taiwan’s national defence,” wrote one person on Tsai’s Facebook page. “[In Ukraine] many big countries have done nothing at all except for sanctioning and praying! These countries are unreliable.” Taiwan’s military is no match for China’s despite billions of dollars in arms purchases from the US. Civilian urban warfare training programmes, similar to those that Ukrainians were filmed practising this week, are still in pilot mode. On Taiwan’s north-east coast in Yilan, a Ukrainian restaurant owner, Sergei Balagov, is watching the invasion of his home from afar. Balagov’s family are still there: a nephew is in Kharkiv, one of the first cities targeted, an uncle and aunt elsewhere in Ukraine. His brother is in Russia. “People are ready to meet the invaders,” he says just hours before Russian missiles hit Ukraine. He fears Taiwan’s people are not. “My feeling is the situation will change drastically in their mind if there are invaders stepping on their country and try to force their will,” he says. “But they need to be more able to fight. Right now … they are quite laid back.”\nRecent polling tends to support his concern. A survey taken just prior to the invasion showed more than half of respondents did not fear a war over Ukraine, and 63% did not think Xi would use the distraction to move on Taiwan. Cole says the crisis could make the threat of war less abstract to the Taiwanese public, and the government should use it to push for a viable reserve force and to encourage citizens to “perhaps dedicate a few weeks/months of their time learning skills that would come in handy in time of emergency”. Bebe believes it is up to Taiwan to defend itself. “Don’t depend on other nations,” she says, putting her faith in “a strong president” and the will of the people “to protect our country”. “Taiwan is not China. Absolutely not. That’s very important.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/china-ponders-how-russia-actions-ukraine-reshape-world-order", "title": "China ponders how Russia’s actions in Ukraine could reshape world order ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/china-ponders-how-russia-actions-ukraine-reshape-world-order", "body": "The news came as a surprise to many in Beijing. Barely 24 hours ago, Chinese pundits predicted that a war in Ukraine was not inevitable. In New York, as Russia geared up for a full-on assault on its neighbour, China’s UN envoy, Zhang Jun, urged in a security council meeting that “the door to a peaceful solution to the Ukraine issue is not fully shut, nor should it be shut”. But when people in Kyiv woke up to sound of bombs in what the Nato chief called a “deliberate, cold-blooded” invasion, the door had clearly been closed. China’s state media, however, insisted it was a “special military action” by Russia. Quoting Vladimir Putin, China’s central television tweeted: “Russia was left with no other choice.” Chinese netizens were fascinated by Russia’s move. Three weeks ago, Putin was the guest of honour at the Beijing Winter Olympics. On 4 February, he and Xi Jinping pledged that there would be “no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation” in their bilateral relationship. On Thursday, millions took to the social media site Weibo to discuss it. So much so, a new phrase was coined: Wu Xin Gong Zuo（乌心工作）to describe those who were so concerned with the situation in Ukraine they could not focus on work. The reality on the ground contrasted with the official Chinese media narrative, yet it also offered a glimpse into the tightrope Beijing is walking. On Thursday, as she refused to use the word “invasion” to describe Russia’s action, the foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, also indicated that China would not provide arms to Russia. “I believe that as a strong country, Russia doesn’t need China or other countries to provide weapons to it,” she said. In his call with Putin on Friday, Xi reiterated that China “respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations” and called for negotiations to resolve the issue. According to the Kremlin, Xi told Putin that he “respects” Russia’s actions. Putin, according to a Chinese readout, said he was “willing to conduct high-level talks with Ukraine”. Bonny Lin, the director of the China Power Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington DC, said “Besides China’s effort to balance its various goals, all indications point to the fact that China prioritises its relationship with Russia at the moment,”adding that Moscow’s action also posed a problem for Beijing. In public, Beijing advocates the position that sovereignty is sacrosanct. This is a discourse it often deploys when it talks about Taiwan, which it regards as a breakaway province. On the other hand, the Ukraine crisis offers Beijing the opportunity to express grievances against its common adversaries with Russia: the US and Nato. So far, the latter appears to be weighing heavier in Beijing’s messaging. This explains why Hua on Thursday invoked the memories of a diplomatic incident from more than 20 years ago. On 7 May 1999, Nato missiles struck the Chinese embassy in Belgrade and set it ablaze in a predawn strike, killing three Chinese nationals. The US claimed it was a “mistake” caused by an out-of-date map, but China was never convinced. “Chinese elites operate in a way that political gains can be prioritised over economic gains,” according to Zeno Leoni, a defence expert at King’s College London. “Right now China’s political goal is to weaken the US-led liberal order. This means that it could accept some economic disruption and continue to publicly support Russia – a marriage of convenience – for the sake of a political objective.”\nLin noted the further escalation of events was likely to worsen China’s relationship with the US and the EU and push countries such as Japan and Australia further away from China. “In the near term, China will be impacted by secondary sanctions and these costs for China will likely increase as the situation in Ukraine deteriorates.” In unveiling the latest round of sanctions on Thursday, Joe Biden took a swipe at Beijing, saying any country that backed Russia’s onslaught in Ukraine would be “stained by association”. “Putin will be a pariah on the international stage,” he declared. For now, Beijing’s mixed tactics appear to have already exposed the limit of its initial approach. On Thursday, China announced it was fully open to Russian wheat imports. But 24 hours later, reports showed that at least two of China’s biggest state-owned banks were restricting financing for purchases of Russian commodities. Leoni said that if military tensions were to escalate across Europe – where China has major economic interests – Beijing’s attitude might still change. “We have seen recently how both Nato’s and Russia’s naval assets have been positioning or involved in trainings in the Mediterranean Sea: Beijing might change its calculus about Russia should military hostilities extend, even mildly, to this region where the bulk of China’s trade with Europe travels through.” Western leaders are alarmed by Beijing’s response as they see the implications for the US-led postwar world order being fundamentally reshaped as a result of Russia’s action. “What we need to make sure in our response today is that we don’t just have a tactical response … But we have a long-term response to the threat to the democratic order,” Jeremy Hunt, a former British foreign secretary, told BBC Radio 4. “There are now two very big powers, Russia and China, that are absolutely committed to upending that order. And that is why we have to think long and hard and smart about what to do next.” Beijing is aware of the diplomatic fallout such a response would cause. But a government researcher, who wished to remain anonymous due to the sensitivity of the matter, quipped: “Even if China joined the west in sanctioning Russia or criticising Russia, will the US-China relations improve?” “We don’t want to face such a difficult choice, either,” he added, admitting Beijing’s dilemma but insisting its policy had to be pragmatic. “After all, China and Russia share a 4,000km-long border. In the long run, China has to be on good terms with Russia.” To realist Chinese foreign policy thinkers, geography and history continue to be relevant in their reasoning of the new world order. The deadly Soviet-China border conflict in 1969 still casts a shadow for Beijing particularly as Biden frames America’s China challenge as “democracy v autocracy”. “We are in the middle of massive changes [in geopolitics] and if you look around, many countries have been adventurous in recent years. For China, it is an opportunity as well as a challenge,” the Beijing- based government researcher said. “Adding the pandemic factor, it’s going to be very chaotic in the years to come.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/putin-ukraine-russian-army-failed-to-deliver-key-military-goals-day-one-ben-wallace", "title": "Russian army failed to deliver key military goals on day one, says Ben Wallace", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/putin-ukraine-russian-army-failed-to-deliver-key-military-goals-day-one-ben-wallace", "body": "An estimated 450 Russian soldiers have died in the conflict in Ukraine so far and Vladimir Putin failed in his military objectives on the first day of fighting, the UK defence secretary has said. Wallace also rebuffed pleas from Ukrainian and some Conservative politicians for the UK to implement a no-fly zone over Ukraine, arguing that introducing one would amount to declaring war on Russia. “Our assessment as of this morning is that Russia has not taken any of its major objectives, in fact it is behind its hoped-for timetable,” Wallace told Sky News. “They have lost over 450 personnel. One of the significant airports they were trying to capture with their elite Spetsnaz [special forces] has failed to be taken. In fact, the Ukrainians have taken it back.\n“So, I think contrary to great Russian claims, and indeed President Putin’s sort of vision that somehow the Ukrainians would be liberated and would be flocking to his cause – he’s got that completely wrong. The Russian army has failed to deliver on day one its main objective.” In a later exchange on BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme, the Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko pleaded with Wallace for the UK and the US to close airspace above Ukraine “in order for these casualties not to escalate”. However Wallace said this would constitute a direct act of aggression towards Russia, which would prompt a response, and result in “war across Europe” as any attack on the UK would implicate all other Nato members. Wallace said: “To do a no-fly zone I would have to put British fighter jets against Russian; Nato would have to declare war on Russia.” He added: “I cannot and won’t trigger a European war but I will help Ukraine fight every street with every piece of equipment we can support them.” Vasylenko warned that Europe is already at war, since “if Ukraine is allowed to fall others will follow”, and other democratic nations should seek to protect a fellow sovereign country. “What you are witnessing is a restructuring of the defence and security framework we are so used to,” she said. She said present sanctions were “not enough” and Ukrainians were disappointed by the lack of support. “We are going into over 24 hours of full-on war with the biggest military power in Europe and still nothing.” Later in the House of Commons, James Heappey, a junior defence minister, said the UK would send extra troops to Estonia “earlier than planned” to reinforce the Nato ally in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The Royal Welsh battlegroup will be arriving in Estonia to double force levels in the country, he said. Heappey also echoed warnings against any potential clash between Russian and Nato troops, saying it could become “existential”. “We must all in this house be clear that British and Nato troops should not, must not, play an active role in Ukraine,” he said. “We must all be clear what the risk of miscalculation could be and how existential that could very quickly become if people miscalculate and things escalate unnecessarily.”\nWallace said the UK had supported accelerating Ukraine’s Nato membership, which would have triggered military intervention from fellow members, but that other countries had been concerned by the pace. He added that other democratic countries have a “moral duty” to continue to arm the Ukrainian forces since it is widely acknowledged that Putin “won’t stop at Ukraine” and will train his sights on Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania after, since he “doesn’t believe the Baltic states are countries”. He told Sky News: “What you’re seeing on your cameras today is illogical. Putin didn’t need to do this, he didn’t need to occupy a sovereign country. None of the reasons why he would do that stack up. He’s not doing something that’s logical, he’s doing something about his ego and his legacy.” In that interview, he added that Putin and Russian military commanders of all rankings “will be held responsible” for their involvement. “Putin has to fail … because he’s fighting our values and all the human rights that we stand for. I don’t know if he’ll fail in Ukraine, we’ll do everything to make sure he does, but if he doesn’t we’ll make sure he fails after that.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/how-to-pronounce-and-spell-kyiv-kiev-ukraine-and-why-it-matters", "title": "How to pronounce and spell ‘Kyiv’, and why it matters", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/how-to-pronounce-and-spell-kyiv-kiev-ukraine-and-why-it-matters", "body": "Kiev or Kyiv? As Russian forces menace the Ukrainian capital and thousands flee, the very least onlookers around the world can do is learn how to say the name of the city under siege. The short answer is simple: Ukrainians call their capital “Kyiv” (kee-yiv), the spelling, a transliteration of the Ukrainian Київ. The Russian version is “Kiev” (kee-yev). The latter, based on transliteration from the Russian cyrillic Киев, became the internationally accepted name through the Soviet period and into the first years of this century, its recognisability enhanced perhaps by the eponymous chicken dish that became popular in the west in the 1970s. But it is now associated with the Russification of Ukraine, and in recent years more and more publications, governments, airports and geographical dictionaries have switched the spelling to the Ukrainian variant. “When I meet someone new, I like to pronounce their name the way they want it pronounced in their language, which is why I think it’s right to pronounce it ‘Kyiv’ as close to the Ukrainian as possible,” said Andrii Smytsniuk, Ukrainian language teacher at Cambridge University. “Many Ukrainians see this as a sign of respect for their language and identity.”\nThe reason for the difference between the two is bound up in centuries of linguistic evolution in a region that has fallen under Mongol, Lithuanian, Polish and Russian empires over the past 1,000 years. Russian and Ukrainian are both east Slavonic languages (as opposed to west Slavonic languages such as Polish, and south Slavonic ones like Bulgarian). “They all come from an original root, but diverged in the ways that languages do,” says Monica White, associate professor in Russian and Slavonic studies at Nottingham University. Ukrainian took on some Polish influences during the early modern period. Several Ukrainian vowels ended up being pronounced quite differently from their Russian counterparts – not an unusual thing in languages when you think about how the word “time” is pronounced in Melbourne, Middlesbrough and Mississippi. There are several letters of the alphabet unique to Ukrainian, for example the ї in Київ, and enough differences in vocabulary to make it hard for Russophones to understand Ukrainians when they speak in their tongue. Not surprisingly, the Ukrainian government mounted a campaign four years ago to secure international approval for the name of its capital city. There is even a popular Twitter hashtag, #KyivNotKiev."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/roman-abramovich-handed-450m-dividend-from-russian-mining-group", "title": "Roman Abramovich handed $450m dividend from Russian mining group ", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/roman-abramovich-handed-450m-dividend-from-russian-mining-group", "body": "The London-listed Russian steel and mining business Evraz has given investors a $1.55bn (£1.2bn) dividend, worth approximately $450m to its shareholder Roman Abramovich, but warned profits could be affected by economic sanctions aimed at the Kremlin and its allies. The company reported a 45% rise revenues to $14.1bn in 2021, primarily from the sale of steel but also from coal, while pre-tax profit more than trebled from $1.3bn to $4.2bn. The result was founded on rising prices, amid soaring demand for steel as the global economy rebounds from the impact of Covid-19. However, the company, whose operations are largely based in Russia, warned it could suffer the effects if the UK, US and Europe step up sanctions against Russian entities in response to Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Evraz has not been included on the list of sanctioned Russian companies, such as the airline Aeroflot and VTB Bank. Speaking on a conference call, at which journalists were not permitted to ask questions, the chief finance officer, Nikolay Ivanov, said it was too soon to say whether the company would be affected by sanctions, including any impact on its lending banks. “Currently, we are analysing the impact of potential sanctions imposed just last night,” he said. “We believe it will not have significant impact on the company.” However, in its annual report, Evraz said “policies adopted by the Russian government” had increased uncertainty and the risk of the imposition of sanctions, which could have an adverse affect on the business. The company has also run a simulation of how sanctions could affect profits, including the potential loss of all exports outside the Russian-influenced Commonwealth of Independent States. It said it could be forced to defer dividends, which would potentially mean a cut in the annual income of the billionaire owner of Chelsea football club, Abramovich, who owns 29% of Evraz. The company gave investors a dividend of $1.55bn this year, of which Abramovich is entitled to just under $450m.\nAbramovich has not been a target for sanctions. Contacted by the Guardian last week, lawyers for the billionaire said Evraz did not fit the criteria for potential designation for sanctions. They added: “It would be ludicrous to suggest that our client has any responsibility or influence over the behaviour of the Russian state.” Evraz has previously held multiple assets in Ukraine but disposed of them in 2018. Referring to the war in its financial results, the company said: “While there have not been direct impacts on the group to date, the board continues to monitor the situation in Ukraine and the response of international governments.” The Guardian has approached Evraz for further comment. Shares in Evraz were up almost 20% on Friday afternoon, making it the top riser on the FTSE 100."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/pure-orwell-how-russian-state-media-spins-ukraine-invasion-as-liberation", "title": "‘Pure Orwell’: how Russian state media spins invasion as liberation", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/pure-orwell-how-russian-state-media-spins-ukraine-invasion-as-liberation", "body": "Turn on Russian state television on Friday afternoon and you will see little sign that the country’s missiles are pounding the Ukrainian capital. Instead, the full force of the state propaganda machine has been mobilised to portray Moscow’s invasion as a defensive campaign to “liberate” Ukraine, focusing much of its coverage on the alleged protection of the Donbas, supposedly under attack by Kyiv. “Our situation is very concerning. The enemy is attacking our positions, entering civilian houses,” said Leonid Pasechnik, the leader of the self-proclaimed republic in Luhansk, to the Rossiya-24 channel.\nA breaking news banner on Channel One said that “Ukraine launched three missiles at the Donetsk People’s Republic in the last seven minutes”. The Russian state news mostly follows Vladimir Putin’s narrative on the war, which he laid out in his address to the nation early on Thursday morning when he announced a limited “special military operation” to “demilitarise” Ukraine and protect citizens in the Donbas from what he claimed was a Ukrainian “genocide”. Throughout Friday morning, a Russian assault on the Ukrainian capital was often simply denied. “Kyiv, as a city where civilians live, hasn’t been bombed by anyone. There hasn’t been any terror there or instructions to cause such terror,” said the Channel One pundit Artyom Sheinin on Friday, contradicting the myriad of reports that have shown the opposite. As it becomes harder for state media to ignore the full-scale invasion into Ukrainian territory, some channels have started to frame Russian soldiers as eagerly anticipated liberators. “The people in the city Kharkiv only have one issue with the Russian army: ‘What took you so long?’” said Olga Skabeyeva, one of the country’s most prominent state television hosts. Coverage of the invasion contrasts steeply with that of other Russian military campaigns. During Russia’s 2015 military intervention in Syria, viewers were often treated to flashy videos of fighter jets destroying their targets. The avoidance of such videos this time serves as a sign that Russian authorities are aware of the country’s deep unease with the conflict. Television remains the biggest news source for Russians despite becoming less trusted over the past decade, past polling has found, and 62% of the population say they get their news from television. But polls also show that most people under 40 prefer to get their news online and from social media. Despite a state crackdown on Russian media, readers can still choose from several independent outlets that have been reporting critically on the country’s involvement in the war, including the popular online platform Meduza and the television channel Dozhd – both recently branded as “foreign agents”. Those who can read English are still able to access foreign press, and there are also many popular independent Telegram channels run by journalists turned bloggers. In contrast to WhatsApp, the widely used encrypted messaging app Telegram allows readers to “follow” users in a similar way to Twitter, which is accessed by only 3% of the population. Alexei Pivovarov, a veteran Russian journalist, runs a channel with almost 500,000 followers, aggregating independent news on the war coming from Russia, Ukraine and the west. Other channels are more opinionated. Commenting on a recent statement by the Kremlin official Valentina Matviyenko, who defended the invasion by saying it “was is the only option to stop a brotherly war”, the Telegram user Stalingulag wrote to his 300,000 followers: “This is pure Orwell, War is Peace, Freedom is Slavery.” Signs are emerging that the Kremlin will try to gain a monopoly on the way Russians perceive events in Ukraine by censoring independent outlets reporting on the war. On Thursday Russia’s media watchdog, Roskomnadzor, demanded that Russian media cite only “official information and data” when covering the conflict. The watchdog vowed to immediately block outlets that did not comply with the order. In a similar move, Russia previously threatened to block at least 10 news outlets unless they deleted their coverage of video investigations by the jailed Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny into high-level corruption. Most outlets gave in to the demands. Over at the state broadcaster RT – which has parroted many of the themes on the war that were aired on Russian state television – the first signs have emerged that its staff are uncomfortable with the network’s war coverage. At least one English-language RT staff member and one frequent RT contributor in Moscow have quit the network in recent days over the editorial position on the war, the Guardian has learned. “In light of recent events, earlier today I resigned from RT with immediate effect,” the former RT staff news writer in Moscow Jonny Tickle tweeted on Thursday. The frequent RT contributor who resigned said, on condition of anonymity, that there had “been an exodus of staff already” at the channel. “Several people already quit – and lots more said to be contemplating.”"}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-invasion-explosions-in-kyiv-as-uk-reports-fierce-resistance-across-the-nation", "title": "Fighting reaches Kyiv as Russian invasion of Ukraine intensifies", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-invasion-explosions-in-kyiv-as-uk-reports-fierce-resistance-across-the-nation", "body": "Fighting has reached the suburbs and historic centre of Kyiv as Russian troops closed in on the Ukrainian capital, while Moscow indicated it was ready to talk and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, pleaded for international help. After early morning missile attacks, Russian forces advanced to the city’s outskirts from three sides on Friday as Ukrainian soldiers set up defensive positions at key bridges and patrolled in armoured vehicles watched by anxious residents. A day after Russia launched a massive invasion of its south-western neighbour, the defence ministry in Moscow claimed it had cut Kyiv off from the west and seized a strategic airport at Hostomel, on the outskirts, allowing it to airlift troops to the front. In an extraordinary message addressed to Ukrainian troops, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, called on them to overthrow the government, whose leaders he described as “terrorists” and “a gang of drug addicts and neo-Nazis”. Ukrainian officials said 1,000 Russian servicemen had been killed so far, but warned that advance enemy units had already entered the Obolonskyi district of northern Kyiv. The defence ministry advised residents to “prepare molotov cocktails”.\nThe mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, said the city had entered “a defensive phase”. He added: “Shots and explosions are ringing out … and saboteurs have already entered Kyiv. The enemy wants to put the capital on its knees and destroy us.” The Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said Russia was ready to send a delegation, including foreign and defence ministry officials, to the Belarusian capital, Minsk, for talks with Ukraine, providing the country agreed to demilitarise. Ukraine has said it is willing to discuss declaring itself a neutral county. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, also said Moscow was ready for talks if Ukrainian forces laid down their arms. “No one is planning to occupy Ukraine,” Lavrov said, insisting Russia’s troops were freeing Ukraine from “oppression”. Zelenskiy pleaded with western powers to act faster to cut off Russia’s economy and provide Ukraine with military assistance. “When bombs fall on Kyiv, it happens in Europe, not just in Ukraine,” he said. “When missiles kill our people, they kill all Europeans.” The west scrambled to respond to Putin’s aggression with a range of fresh sanctions against Moscow, with the US also announcing it would send a further 7,000 troops to Germany to shore up Nato’s eastern borders. There were divisions, however, on the strength of the response. The US president, Joe Biden, and his Nato counterparts sought to reassure member countries on the alliance’s eastern flank, from Estonia to Bulgaria, that their security was guaranteed as Russian forces advanced on Kyiv. “Russia has shattered peace on the European continent,” the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said as he opened a video summit. “Moscow bears sole responsibility for the deliberate, cold-blooded and long-planned invasion.” The UN security council will also vote on Friday on a draft resolution condemning Russia’s invasion and requiring an immediate withdrawal – although Moscow can veto the measure and it was unclear how China would vote. The EU on Friday was set to freeze European assets linked to Putin and Lavrov and introduce more measures against Russian banks and industry after facing angry remonstrations from Kyiv for holding back from cutting Russia out of the Swift international payments system through which it receives foreign currency. Zelenskiy earlier on Friday accused Europe of not being hard or quick enough in sanctioning Russia earlier, urging citizens to compel their governments to do more to stop Putin’s invasion. “Europe has enough strength to stop this aggression,” he said. “You have to act swiftly. We demand effective counteraction to the Russian Federation. Sanctions must be further strengthened.” France’s finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, said as he arrived for an EU meeting in Brussels that further sanctions were likely. “This isn’t enough. We need to choke the Russian system and in particular further target the oligarchs,” he said.\nAccording to a leaked draft of the new sanctions agreed by EU leaders, all members of the Duma, the Russian security council and any Belarusian officials in the military and ministry of defence who “facilitated” the invasion of Ukraine will be subject to travel bans and asset freezes. Le Maire said, however, that ejecting Russia from Swift, which would have serious economic consequences for leading EU member states including Germany, France and Italy, would be “a very last resort”. Beyond the diplomatic arena, Uefa moved the Champions League final to Paris from St Petersburg, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) called on international sports federations to cancel all current or future sporting events in Russia, and Russia was ejected from the Eurovision song contest. The invasion could drive up to 5 million people to flee abroad, UN aid agencies said on Friday, adding that at least 100,000 people are already uprooted in the country and fuel, cash and medical supplies were running low. Streams of people – mostly women and children, since Ukrainian men aged 18-60 are forbidden to leave – crossed into Hungary, Poland and Romania, with 15-hour queues reported at border points. Guards fired warning shots to prevent a stampede at Kyiv’s central station as thousands tried to force their way on to evacuation trains. Earlier on Friday, heavy pre-dawn blasts in Kyiv set off a second day of violence after Putin on Thursday defied western warnings to unleash the biggest attack on a European state since the second world war.\n“Horrific Russian rocket strikes on Kyiv,” Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, tweeted. “Last time our capital experienced anything like this was in 1941 when it was attacked by Nazi Germany. Ukraine defeated that evil and will defeat this one.” Cleaning broken glass from her room, one Kyiv resident, Oxana Gulenko, said: “How we can live through it in our time? What should we think. Putin should be burned in hell along with his whole family.” Witnesses said loud explosions could also be heard in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-biggest city, close to the border with Russia, while air raid sirens sounded over Lviv in the west. A resident told the Guardian the eastern city of Sumy had been taken.\nIn the village of Starognativka, near the frontline where separatists have faced off against Kyiv’s forces for years, a local official, Volodymyr Veselkin, said missiles had been raining down all morning and the power was out. “They are trying to wipe the village off the face of the earth,” he said.\nZelenskiy said in a televised address that Putin was targeting civilian as well as military sites. “They say that civilian objects are not a target for them. It is a lie; they do not distinguish in which areas to operate,” he said, vowing to continue defending his country and criticising world leaders for “watching from afar”. The international criminal court said on Friday it might investigate possible war crimes, though did not provide any further details. Putin says Ukraine is an illegitimate state carved out of Russia, although his ultimate aims remain obscure. In Russia, thousands of people defied tough anti-protest legislation to stage anti-war rallies across the country on Thursday night. OVD-Info, which monitors arrests at opposition protests, said more than 1,800 people in 59 cities had been detained."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/western-powers-have-realised-russia-is-largely-immune-to-sanctions-ukraine-putin", "title": "Western powers have realised Russia is largely immune to sanctions", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/western-powers-have-realised-russia-is-largely-immune-to-sanctions-ukraine-putin", "body": "The war against Russia is one western countries want to fight with only economic sanctions, not guns. Russia’s conflict with Ukraine, despite its long gestation and planning by Vladimir Putin and his supporters in the Kremlin, was supposed to end quickly once financial retaliation began. Yes, there would be military skirmishes on the ground, but little more than a few casualties were expected once a range of penalties began to bite. The western powers have quickly realised that unless they are willing to fire the financial equivalent of a nuclear arsenal, Putin has made sure Russia is largely immune, at least in the short term. Over a decade, Kremlin policy has carefully reduced domestic public and private sector debt and allowed the central bank time to build a war chest of foreign assets large enough to shore up the country’s finances for months, if not years. This means that the sanctions put in place over the past couple of days by the EU, US, UK, Japan and Canada are unlikely to have any significant effect on the Russian economy or its financial stability. Only the full package of measures used against Iran – shutting Russia out of the international payments system, Swift, while also banning purchases of Russian oil and gas – will do the trick. As Hosuk Lee-Makiyama, the head of the European Centre for International Political Economy, said, Europe has allowed itself to become more integrated with Russia, while Russia has separated itself from Europe. He said EU countries owned a combined €300bn of Russian assets that would be vulnerable to confiscation if a full-blooded financial war broke out. The UK owns billions more via firms such as BP, which has a near-20% stake in the Russian oil company Rosneft. “Sanctions are one of the few options that European countries have in a conflict situation like this. If you disconnect North Korea or Iran from the international financial system, you do not expose yourself to that much damage.” Speaking on BBC News, he added: “But while I don’t say it is impossible to envisage Russia being barred from the Swift system, it is a nuclear option that means you exterminate yourself along with your enemy.” Swift (the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) is the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, allowing international trade to flow smoothly. It transmits trillions of dollars’ worth of deals every day, but is coming under pressure from a Chinese government-backed rival, Cips, which Russia could use to conduct its financial business deals supplemented by direct transactions with counterparties. It is also possible for the G7 countries and EU to ban the purchase of Russian gas and oil, but commodities analysts agree that while there is spare capacity in oil markets to make up for the loss of Russian supplies with a price rise limited to $140 a barrel, there is no hope of boosting gas output to fill a gap created by a Russia ban. Shortages would quickly force countries in Europe to ration gas and the price would be likely to rocket back to nine times normal levels, as seen before Christmas, stirring memories of the 1974 oil price shock. Andrew Kenningham, the chief Europe economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said that while some countries – the Czech Republic and the Baltic states – had pushed for bans on Russian gas, “others are more reluctant and it would presumably take much more devastating developments in the conflict to trigger such measures”. Tom Mayne, a Russia expert at the thinktank Chatham House, said there was room to improve the current sanctions that allow a Russian kleptocracy access to London’s financial markets. In a report last year, the thinktank said an effective anti-kleptocracy drive would “close legal loopholes, demand transparency from public institutions, deploy anti-corruption sanctions against post-Soviet elites and prosecute British professionals who enable money laundering by kleptocrats”. Even the ramped-up sanctions announced by Boris Johnson fall short of this effective ban on illegal Russian money entering UK economic life. The UK is keen to go further than the EU with restrictions on Russian energy imports, but the EU has allowed itself to be much more dependent than the UK, limiting its appetite for further sanctions. Without bans on gas and oil exports, and expulsion from international payments systems, the impact of sanctions will be limited."}, {"id": "world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-the-wests-role-in-this-unfurling-catastrophe", "title": "The unfolding catastrophe in Ukraine is a reckoning for the west | Letters", "url": "https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/ukraine-the-wests-role-in-this-unfurling-catastrophe", "body": "In addition to the foreign policy mistakes listed by Timothy Garton Ash (Russia’s invasion of Ukraine will change the face of Europe for ever, 24 February), we should acknowledge the serious error of western powers, in particular America and Britain, who responded to the collapse of communism in eastern Europe in 1989-90 with a spirit of triumphalism. The ensuing humiliation and isolation felt by the Russian people was exactly the sort of climate would-be nationalist demagogues are able to exploit to dangerous effect, and Vladimir Putin’s egregious attack on Ukraine is now an outcome for which we in the west are, at least partly, responsible. There will come a time – though it is unlikely to be soon and the task may not initially be easy, given the newly kindled fears and suspicions of eastern European states – when the fall of Putin gives the west an opportunity to begin to build a much more positive and cordial relationship with Russia. This is something many of its currently suppressed citizens would warmly welcome. We should be especially mindful of the mistake we made 30 years ago when that chance arises. Dr Gerald Dunning Tonteg, Pontypridd • Whatever European politicians might say, they cannot disguise the fact that they are unwilling to take action to prevent aggressive Russian incursions into their homeland. The events leading up to the invasion seem suspiciously similar to the appeasement of Hitler. It was a no-no for western countries and Nato to help Ukraine equip its armed forces against possible Russian aggression, for fear of upsetting Vladimir Putin. Perhaps Germany’s offer of 5,000 protective helmets symbolises the weakness of the European approach. Although through inaction the west has made it almost impossible to offer help to Ukrainians, it has a moral obligation to do so. The west must not repeat the humiliation of Budapest in 1956, when, having encouraged the Hungarians to rise against the Communist government, it did nothing to help when the Russian tanks rolled into Budapest. Timothy Garton Ash is right that the west must act to prevent similar incursions in future. However, can European politicians rise to the occasion and take the necessary action to curb Putin? Looking at British politics, I can only see the unlikelihood of the necessary pan-European action being taken. At present, our politics is dominated by an insular, Europhobic Conservative party and government in thrall to the City of London and Russian money. Not the politicians capable of leading, or being part of, an effective collaborative effort to restrain Russia. Derrick Joad Leeds • When nations are backed into a corner, they eventually lash out. Hitler was Germany’s disastrous response to the onerous war reparations inflicted by the first world war victors. Vladimir Putin is Russia’s disastrous response to the triumphal advance of Nato and the EU across the old Soviet fiefdoms of eastern Europe. Nelson Mandela, uniquely, understood that it is crucial for victors to be magnanimous, to offer friendship to those they defeated, and thus seek to avoid renewed conflict. We have not learned from him. Putin is a monster. But we, the west, were the midwives at his birth. David Allen Nottingham • Finally, after dithering as usual, the prime minister has had to recognise reality, admitting that “this is a catastrophe for our continent”. He now appears to align the United Kingdom with the continent of Europe and to recognise the need for unified action. What a pity he didn’t accept that before tearing apart one of the most useful alliances in history. No one is going to pay attention to this country on its own, and we are hardly going to achieve peace with two of the most heinous liars in the world dealing with the situation. Larry Johnston Brecon, Powys • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication."}]